





CHAPTER I

On the drive home, the barouche was reduced to a crawl by the long line of carriages returning by the side of the lake. At one point they had to pull up completely.
  The sun was setting in a grey October sky, streaked on the horizon with thin clouds. One last ray, falling from the distant shrubbery of the waterfall, threaded along the roadway and bathed the long line of stationary carriages with pale red light. The golden glints, the bright ﬂashes given oﬀ by the wheels, seemed to have settled along the straw-coloured edges of the barouche, while the dark-blue panels reﬂected patches of the surrounding landscape. Higher up, in the red light that lit them up from behind and made the brass buttons of  their capes half-folded across the back of the box shine even more brightly, sat the coachman and the footman, in their dark-blue liveries, drab breeches, and black and yellow striped waistcoats, erect, solemn, and patient, like well-bred servants untroubled by an obstruction of carriages. Their hats, decorated with black cockades, looked very digniﬁed. The horses, a pair of splendid bays, snorted impatiently.
  ‘Look,’ said Maxime, ‘that’s Laure d’Aurigny over there, in that brougham.’
  Renée sat up, and blinked with the exquisite grimace caused by her short-sightedness.
  ‘I thought she had disappeared,’ said Renée. ‘She has changed the colour of her hair, hasn’t she?’
‘Yes,’ replied Maxime with a laugh. ‘Her new lover hates red.’
  Awakened from the melancholy dream that had kept her silent for an hour, stretched out on the back seat of the carriage as on an invalid’s chaise longue, Renée leaned forward to look, resting her hand on the low door of the barouche. Over a gown consisting of a mauve silk polonaise and tunic, trimmed with wide, plaited ﬂounces, she wore a little coat of white cloth with mauve velvet lapels, which made her look very smart. Her strange, fawn-coloured hair, like the colour of ﬁne butter, was barely concealed by a tiny bonnet adorned with a little bunch of Bengal roses. She continued to screw up her eyes in a way that made her look like a cheeky little boy, her smooth  forehead furrowed by a long crease, her upper lip protruding like a sulky child’s. Then, ﬁnding that she could not see, she took her eyeglass, a man’s double eyeglass with a tortoiseshell frame, and, holding it in her hand without placing it on her nose, examined at leisure the fat Laure d’Aurigny, with an air of complete detachment. The carriages did not move. In the mass of dark patches made by the line of broughams, of which so many had  crowded into the Bois that autumn afternoon, gleamed the glass of a carriage window, the bit of a bridle, the plated socket of a lamp, the braid on the livery of a lackey perched on his box. Here and there a piece of fabric, part of a woman’s silk or velvet dress, ﬂashed from an open landau. Little by little a deep silence had replaced all the activity and movement, which had subsided into stillness. The people in the carriages could hear the conversations of those on foot. Silent glances were exchanged from window to window; no one spoke, the silence broken only by the creaking of a harness or the impatient pawing of a horse’s hoof. The muﬄed sounds of the Bois died away in the
distance.
  Tout Paris was there, in spite of the lateness of the season: the Duchesse de Sternich, in a chariot; Madame de Lauwerens, in a smart victoria and pair; the Baronne de Meinhold, in an enchanting light-brown cab; the Comtesse Vanska, with her piebald ponies; Madame Daste, with her famous black steppers ; Madame de  Guende and Madame Teissière in a brougham; little Sylvia in a dark-blue landau. Then there was Don Carlos, in mourning, with his solemn, old-fashioned liveries; Selim Pasha, with his fez and without his tutor; the Duchesse de Rozan, in a miniature brougham, with her powdered livery; the Comte de Chibray, in a dog cart; Mr Simpson, driving his perfectly appointed drag; and the whole American colony. Then, ﬁnally, two Academicians in a hired cab.
  The front carriages were ﬁnally able to proceed, and one by one the whole line began to move slowly forward. It was like an awakening. A thousand shimmering lights seemed to appear, quick ﬂashes played on the wheels, sparks ﬂew from the horses’ harness. On the ground, on the trees, appeared broad reﬂections of trotting glass.   The glitter of wheels and harness, the blaze of varnished panels glowing with the redness of the setting sun, the bright notes of colour cast by the dazzling liveries perched up full against the sky, and by the rich costumes spilling out through the carriage doors,
  
were accompanied by a continuous, hollow rumbling sound, marked by the rhythmic trot of the horses. The procession continued, with the same eﬀects of light and noise, unceasingly and in a single movement, as if the front carriages were dragging all the others behind them.
  Renée yielded to the sudden movement of the barouche, and letting go of her eyeglass, threw herself back on the cushions. Shivering, she drew towards her a corner of the bearskin that ﬁlled the inside of the carriage as with a sheet of silky snow, and thrust her gloved hands into the long, soft, curly hair. A breeze began to blow. The warm October day, which had given the Bois a feeling of spring and brought the great ladies out in open carriages, threatened to end in    a bitterly cold evening.
  For a moment Renée remained huddled in the warmth of her corner, lulled by the pleasurable sound of the turning wheels of the carriages. Then, raising her head to look at Maxime, whose eyes were calmly undressing the women displayed to view in the adjacent broughams and landaus, she said:
  ‘Tell me, do you really think that Laure d’Aurigny is attractive? You sounded very keen on her the other day, when they were discussing the sale of her diamonds! By the way, did you see the necklace and aigrette your father bought for me at the sale?’
  ‘Yes, he does things very well,’ said Maxime without answering, laughing mischievously. ‘He knows how to pay Laure’s debts as well as give his wife diamonds.’
Renée shrugged slightly.
‘You little devil!’ she murmured with a smile.
  Maxime was leaning forward, looking attentively at a lady whose green dress interested him. Renée sank back, and with half-closed eyes gazed languidly at both sides of the avenue, seeing nothing. On the right, copses and low-cut trees with russet leaves and slender branches passed slowly by; at intervals, on the track reserved for riders, slim-waisted gentlemen galloped past, their steeds raising little clouds of ﬁne dust behind them. On the left, at the foot of the narrow lawns intersected by ﬂower-beds and shrubs, the lake, clear as crystal, without a ripple, lay as though neatly trimmed along its edges by the gardeners’ spades; and on the far side of this translucent mirror, the two islands, between them the grey bar of the connecting bridge, displayed their smiling slopes and, against the
  
pale sky, the theatrical grouping of ﬁr trees and evergreens, whose black foliage, like the fringe of curtains carefully draped along the edge of the horizon, was reﬂected in the water. This scrap of nature, like a newly painted piece of scenery, lay bathed in a faint shadow, in a pale blue haze that gave the distant scene an exquisite charm, an air of entrancing artiﬁciality. On the other bank, the Chalet des Îles, as if freshly varnished, shone like a new toy; and the paths of yellow sand, the narrow garden walks that wind among the lawns and around the lake, edged with iron hoops in imitation of rustic woodwork, stood out more curiously, in the dying light, against the soft green of grass and water.
  Renée, used to the artful charms of these sights, and yielding once more to her languor, had lowered her eyelids altogether, and looked only at her slender ﬁngers twisting the long hairs of the bearskin. There was a sudden jolt in the even trot of the line of carriages and, looking up, she nodded to two young ladies lolling side by side in a chariot that was noisily leaving the road that skirts the lake, in order to go down one of the side avenues. The Marquise d’Espanet, whose husband, an aide-de-camp to the Emperor, had recently scandalized the discontented members of the old nobility by loudly declaring his total support for the Empire, was one of the most celebrated ladies of the court; her companion, Madame Haﬀner, was the wife of a well-known manufacturer from Colmar, a multi-millionaire whom the Empire was turning into a politician. Renée, who had been at school with the two inseparables, as people had nicknamed them knowingly, called them by their ﬁrst names, Adeline and Suzanne.
  As she was about to sink back into her corner, after giving them a smile, a laugh from Maxime made her turn round.
  ‘No, don’t, I’m too depressed: don’t laugh, I’m serious,’ she said, seeing that the young man was looking at her ironically, making fun of the way she was huddled in her corner of the barouche.
Maxime put on a comic voice:
‘How unhappy we are: how jealous.’ She looked surprised.
‘Me!’ she said. ‘Jealous of what?’
Then she added, with a pout of contempt, as if remembering:  ‘Ah, yes, that fat Laure! I hadn’t given her a thought, believe me.
If, as everybody says, Aristide has paid that woman’s debts and saved her a trip abroad, it only proves that he’s less fond of money than I

thought. This will put him back in the ladies’ good graces. The dear man can do whatever he likes.’
  She smiled, saying the words ‘the dear man’ in a tone of benign indiﬀerence. Suddenly, becoming depressed again, casting around her the despairing glance of women who do not know what form of amusement to indulge in, she murmured:
‘Oh, I’d like to... But no, I’m not jealous, not in the least.’ She stopped, not sure what to say.
‘You know, I’m bored,’ she said at last, abruptly.
  Then she sat silent, her lips tightly closed. The line of carriages was still travelling along the side of the lake, with its even trot and a noise like a distant waterfall. On the left, between the water and the roadway, rose little bushes of evergreens with thin straight stems, forming curious little clusters of pillars. On the right, the copses and low trees had come to an end; the Bois opened out into broad lawns, vast expanses of grass, with here and there a group of tall trees; the greensward ran on, with gentle undulations, to the Porte de la Muette, whose low gates, which seemed like a piece of black lace stretched along the ground, were visible in the distance; and on the slopes, in the hollows, the grass was quite blue. Renée stared blankly before her, as if this widening of the horizon, these gentle meadows, soaked in the evening air, made her feel more keenly the emptiness of her life.
After a pause, she repeated querulously:
‘Oh, I’m bored, bored to death.’
  ‘You’re not much fun, you know,’ said Maxime calmly. ‘Your nerves are bad, obviously.’
‘Yes, my nerves are bad,’ she repeated dryly. Then she became motherly:
  ‘I’m growing old, my dear child; I’ll soon be thirty. It’s terrible. Nothing gives me pleasure. You’re only twenty, you can’t understand.’ ‘Did you bring me here to listen to your life story?’ interrupted
the young man. ‘It would take an eternity.’
  She greeted this impertinence with a faint smile, as if it were the outburst of a spoilt child who said anything he pleased.
  ‘You have every right to complain,’ continued Maxime. ‘You spend more than a hundred thousand francs a year on your ward-robe, you live in a mansion, you have splendid horses, your every whim is satisﬁed, and the newspapers report every new gown of
  
yours as an event of the highest importance; women envy you and men would give ten years of their lives to kiss your ﬁngertips. Isn’t it true?’
  She nodded. Her eyes lowered, she had resumed curling the hairs of the bearskin.
  ‘Don’t be so modest,’ Maxime continued. ‘Admit that you’re one of the pillars of the Second Empire. We needn’t hide these things from each other. Wherever you go, to the Tuileries, to the houses of ministers, to the houses of mere millionaires, high or low, you’re treated like a queen. There isn’t a pleasure you haven’t tasted, and if I had the courage, if my respect for you did not hold me back, I’d say...’
  He paused for a few seconds, laughing, then ﬁnished his sentence boldly:
‘I’d say you’ve bitten every apple.’ She did not bat an eyelid.
  ‘And you’re bored!’ resumed the young man, with comic indignation. ‘It’s scandalous! What is it you want? What on earth are you dreaming about?’
  She shrugged, as if to imply that she did not know. Though she kept her head bowed, Maxime could see that she looked so serious and so sad that he thought it best to hold his tongue. He watched the line of carriages, which, when they reached the end of the lake, spread out, ﬁlling the whole of the intersection. They swept round majestically; the quicker trot of the horses sounded noisily on the hard ground.
  The barouche, making a large circuit to join the line, rocked in     a way that Maxime found vaguely pleasurable. Then, yielding to his desire to heap criticism on Renée, he said:
  ‘You know, you deserve to ride in a cab! It would serve you right! Look at these people going back to Paris, they’re all at your feet. They greet you as if you were their queen, and your dear friend, Monsieur de Mussy, can hardly prevent himself from blowing kisses at you.’
  A horseman was in fact greeting Renée. Maxime had been talking in a hypocritical, mocking voice. But Renée barely turned round, and shrugged. This time Maxime made a gesture of despair.
  ‘Really,’ he said, ‘has it come to this? Good God, you’ve got everything: what more do you want?’
  
  Renée looked up. Her eyes glowed with the desire of unsatisﬁed curiosity.
‘I want something diﬀerent,’ she replied softly.
  ‘But since you have everything,’ resumed Maxime, laughing, ‘there is nothing diﬀerent. What does “something diﬀerent” mean?’
‘What?’ she repeated.
  She fell silent. She had turned right round, and was watching the strange picture fading behind her. It was almost night; twilight was spreading slowly like ﬁne ash. The lake, seen from the front, in the pale light that still hovered over the water, became rounder, like a huge tin ﬁsh; on either side, the plantations of evergreens, whose slim, straight stems seemed to rise up from its still surface, looked at this hour like purple colonnades, delineating with their even shapes the studied curves of the shore; and shrubs rose in the background, confused masses of foliage forming large black patches that closed oﬀ the horizon. Behind these patches was the glow of the dying sunset, which set ﬁre to only a small portion of the grey immensity. Above the still lake, the low copses, the strangely ﬂat perspective, stretched the vast sky, inﬁnite, deepened and widened. The great slice of sky hanging over this small piece of nature caused a thrill, an indeﬁnable sadness; and from these paling heights fell so deep an autumnal melancholy, so sweet and heart-breaking a darkness, that the Bois, wound little by little in a shadowy shroud, lost its worldly graces, and widened out, full of the powerful charm that forests have. The wheels of the carriages, whose bright colours were fading in the twilight, sounded like the distant voices of leaves and running water. Everything was slowly dying away. In the middle of the lake, in the general evanescence, the lateen sail of the great pleasure-boat stood out strongly against the glow of the sunset. It was now impossible to distinguish anything but this sail, this triangle of yellow canvas, enormously enlarged.
  Renée, satiated as she was, had a strange feeling of illicit desire at the sight of this landscape that had become unrecognizable, of this scrap of nature, so worldly and artiﬁcial, which the great pulsating darkness had transformed into a sacred grove, one of the ideal glades in whose recesses the gods of antiquity  hid  their  Titanic  loves, their adulteries, their divine incests. As the barouche drove towards Paris, it seemed to her that the twilight was carrying oﬀ behind her, in its tremulous veil, the land of her dreams, the shameful, mythical
  
alcove in which her sick heart and weary ﬂesh might at last have found satisfaction.
  When, fading into the shadows, the lake and bushes showed only as a black bar against the sky, Renée turned round abruptly and, in  an annoyed tone, resumed her interrupted sentence:
  ‘What? Something diﬀerent, yes! I want something diﬀerent.  How can I know what! If I knew... You know, I’m sick of balls, sick of suppers, sick of pleasures of that sort. It’s so boring. And men are insuﬀerable, absolutely insuﬀerable.’
  Maxime began to laugh. A certain excitement was discernible beneath the aristocratic manner of the society lady. She no longer ﬂuttered her eyelids, and the line on her forehead stood out even more; her lip, so much like a sulky child’s, protruded as if desperately seeking the nameless pleasures she pined for. She saw that Maxime was laughing, but was too excited to stop; lying back, swayed by the rocking of the carriage, she continued in short, sharp sentences:
  ‘Absolutely, yes, you’re all insuﬀerable. I don’t include you, Maxime, you’re too young. But if I told you how oppressive I found Aristide in the early days! And the others! The men I’ve had as lovers... You know, we’re good friends, you and I: I can conﬁde in you; well, there are days when I’m so tired of living the life of a rich woman, adored and worshipped, that I feel I’d rather be somebody like Laure d’Aurigny, one of those ladies who live quite independent lives.’
As Maxime began to laugh even more, she insisted: ‘Yes, a Laure d’Aurigny. It must surely be less boring.’
  She sat silent for a few minutes, as if imagining the life she would lead if she were Laure. Then, with a note of discouragement in her voice, she resumed:
  ‘But I suppose those women must have their problems too. There’s no pleasure in life. It’s deadly. As I said, there ought to be something diﬀerent, you understand; I can’t imagine what, but something else, something that would happen to nobody but oneself, something completely new, a rare, unknown pleasure...’
  She spoke slowly. She uttered these last words as if trying to discover something, and sank into a deep reverie. The barouche went up the avenue leading out of the Bois. It was getting darker; the copses ran along on either side like grey walls; the yellow iron chairs
  
on which, on ﬁne evenings, the bourgeois love to disport themselves in their Sunday best, were lined up along the footpaths, empty, with the desolate air of garden furniture in winter; and the dull rhythmical sound of the carriages could be heard along the avenues like a sad refrain.
  Maxime undoubtedly appreciated the bad form of thinking that life could be enjoyable. Though young enough to give himself over to the occasional outburst of contented admiration, he was too selfish, too cynical and indiﬀerent, and already too world-weary not to declare himself disgusted, sick, played out. He usually took a certain pride in making this confession.
  He threw himself back in the carriage like Renée, and assumed a plaintive tone.
  ‘Yes, you’re right,’ he said. ‘It’s deadly. Actually, I’m no better than you at ﬁnding enjoyment; I’ve often dreamt of something different too. There’s nothing more pointless than travel. As for making money, I prefer to spend it, though even that isn’t always as much fun as one imagines. Loving and being loved: we soon get sick of that, don’t we?’
  Renée did not respond, and he went on, wanting to shock her with a piece of gross blasphemy:
  ‘I’d like a nun to fall in love with me. That might be fun. Have you ever dreamt of loving a man you couldn’t think about without committing a crime?’
  She did not react, and Maxime concluded that she was not listening. She seemed to be sleeping with her eyes open, the nape of her neck resting against the padded edge of the barouche. She lay listlessly, thinking, prey to the dreams that kept her in a sombre mood, and from time to time a slight nervous tremor passed over her lips. She was slowly overcome by the shadow of the twilight; all that this shadow contained of sadness, of discreet pleasures and secret hopes, penetrated her, enveloping her with an air of morbid languor. Doubtless, while staring at the round back of the footman on his box, she was thinking of those ﬂeeting delights, of those entertainments that had faded so quickly, and of which she was now so weary; she pictured her past life, the instantaneous satisfaction of her appetites, the sickening luxury, the appalling monotony of the same loves and the same betrayals. Then, like a ray of hope, there came to her, with shivers of longing, the idea of that ‘something diﬀerent’ that her
  
conscious mind could hardly grasp. Her dreams wandered. The  word she strove to ﬁnd escaped into the night, became lost in the movement of the carriages. The gentle vibration of the barouche was but one more impediment to the formulation of her desire. An immense temptation rose from the empty space, from the copses asleep in the shadows on either side of the avenue, from the noise of wheels and from the gentle oscillation that made her so pleasantly drowsy. A thousand tremulous emotions passed over her body: unrealized dreams, nameless delights, confused longings, all the monstrous voluptuousness that a drive home from the Bois under a paling sky can infuse into a woman’s heart. She kept both hands buried in the bearskin, she was quite warm in her white cloth coat with the mauve velvet lapels. She put out her foot, stretching, and her ankle lightly touched Maxime’s warm leg; he took no notice. A jolt aroused her from her torpor. She raised her head, and her grey eyes looked curiously at the young man who sat lounging in an attitude of sheer elegance.
  At this moment the barouche left the Bois. The Avenue de l’Impératrice stretched out in the darkness, with the two green lines of its painted fences meeting on the horizon. In the side-path reserved for riders, a white horse formed a bright patch in the grey shadows. Here and there, on the other side, along the roadway, were late strollers, groups of black spots, making their way slowly back to Paris; and high up, at the end of the procession of carriages, the Arc de Triomphe,  seen at an angle, stood out in its whiteness against      a vast expanse of sooty sky.
  As the barouche went up the avenue at an increased pace, Maxime, charmed by the English appearance of the scene, looked out at the irregular architecture of the private houses, with their lawns running down to the pavements. Renée, still dreaming, amused herself by watching the gaslamps in the Place de l’Étoile being lit, one by one, on the edge of the horizon, and as each of these bright jets splashed the dying day with its little yellow ﬂame, she seemed to hear mysterious voices; it seemed that Paris was being lit up for her, making ready the unknown pleasure for which her senses yearned.
  The barouche turned into  the  Avenue  de  la  Reine-Hortense and pulled up  at  the  end  of  the  Rue  Monceau,  a  few  steps  from the Boulevard Malesherbes, in front of a large mansion standing between a courtyard and a garden. The two gates, heavily
  
ornamented with gilt decorations, which opened into the courtyard, were ﬂanked by a pair of lamps shaped like urns, similarly covered with gilding, and in which ﬂared broad gas jets. Between the two gates, the concierge lived in a pretty lodge vaguely suggestive of a little Greek temple.
  Maxime sprang lightly to the ground as the carriage was about to enter the courtyard.
  ‘You know,’ said Renée, grasping him by the hand, ‘dinner is at half-past seven. You have more than an hour to dress. Don’t keep us waiting.’
And she added with a smile:
  ‘The de Mareuils are coming... Your father wants you to pay Louise every attention.’
Maxime shrugged.
  ‘What a bore!’ he murmured peevishly. ‘I don’t mind marrying her, but wooing her is just silly. I would appreciate it, Renée, if you would rescue me from Louise this evening.’
  He put on his comic look, the accent and grimace he borrowed from Lassouche whenever he was about to tell one of his stock jokes.
‘Will you, stepmother dear?’
  Renée shook hands with him in masculine fashion, and quickly, with nervous, jesting boldness, said:
  ‘If I hadn’t married your father, I’m sure you would have wanted to court me.’
  The young man seemed to ﬁnd the idea very funny, for he was still laughing when he turned the corner of the Boulevard Malesherbes.
  The barouche entered and drew up in front of the steps. These steps, broad and low, were sheltered by a great glass awning, with a scalloped bordering with gilded acorns. The house’s two storeys rose up above the servants’ quarters, whose square windows, glazed with frosted glass, appeared almost at ground level. At the top of the steps the hall door projected outwards, ﬂanked by slender columns set into the wall, forming a slight break, marked at each storey by a bay window, and ascending to the roof, where it ﬁnished in a pediment. The storeys had ﬁve windows on either side, placed at regular intervals along the façade, and simply framed in stone. The roof was    cut oﬀ square above the attic windows, with broad and almost perpendicular sides.
On the garden side the façade was far more sumptuous. A regal

ﬂight of steps led to a narrow terrace that skirted the whole length   of the ground ﬂoor; the balustrade of this terrace, designed to match the railings of the Parc Monceau, was even more heavily gilded than the awning or the lamps in the courtyard. Above this rose the mansion, having at each corner a pavilion, a sort of tower half enclosed in the body of the building, and containing rooms that were circular in shape. In the centre there bulged out slightly a third turret, more deeply contained in the building. The windows, tall and narrow in the turrets, wider apart and almost square on the ﬂat portions of the façade, had on the ground ﬂoor stone balustrades and on the upper ﬂoors gilded wrought-iron railings. The display of decoration was profuse. The house was hidden under its sculpture. Around the windows and along the cornices ran volutes of ﬂowers and branches; there were balconies shaped like baskets full of blossoms, and supported by tall, naked women with wide hips and jutting breasts; and here and there were fanciful escutcheons, clusters of fruit, roses, every ﬂower it is possible for stone or marble to represent. The higher one looked, the more the building burst into blossom. Around the roof ran a balustrade on which urns, at regular intervals, stood blazing with ﬂames of stone; and there, between the bull’s-eye windows of the attics, which opened on to an incredible mass of fruit and foliage, mantled the crowning portions of this amazing spectacle, the pediments of the turrets, in the midst of which the naked women reappeared, playing with apples, adopting poses amidst sheaves of rushes. The roof, loaded with these ornaments and surmounted by a cresting of embossed lead, with two lightning conductors and four huge, symmetrical chimneystacks carved like all the rest, seemed the ﬁnishing-piece of this architectural ﬁrework display.
  On the right was an enormous hothouse, built on to the side of the house and communicating with the ground ﬂoor through the  glass door of a drawing room. The garden, separated from the Parc Monceau by a low railing concealed by a hedge, had a considerable slope. Too small for the house, so small that a lawn and a few clumps of evergreens ﬁlled it entirely, it was there simply as a mound, a green pedestal on which the house stood proudly planted in its gala dress. Seen from the gardens, across the well-trimmed grass and the glistening foliage of the shrubs, this remarkable ediﬁce, still new and pallid, had the wan face, the purse-proud, foolish self-importance   of a female parvenu, with its heavy headdress of slates, its gilded
  
ﬂounces, and its mass of sculpture. It was a miniature version of the new Louvre, one of the most typical examples of the Napoleon III style, that opulent bastard of so many styles. On summer evenings, when the rays of the setting sun lit up the gilt of the railings against its white façade, the strollers in the gardens would stop to look at the crimson silk curtains behind the ground-ﬂoor windows; and through the sheets of plate glass so wide and clear that they seemed like the window-fronts of a big modern department store, arranged so as to display to the outside world the wealth within, the petty bourgeoisie could catch glimpses of the corners of tables and chairs, of portions of hangings, of patches of ornate ceilings, the sight of which would root them to the spot, in the middle of the pathways, with envy and admiration.
  But at this moment the shadows were falling from the trees, and the façade slept. On the other side, in the courtyard, the footman was respectfully helping Renée to alight. At the far end of a glass covered-way on the right, the stables, banded with red brick, opened wide their doors of polished oak. On the left, as if for balance, built into the wall of the adjacent house, there was a decorative niche, within which a sheet of water ﬂowed continuously from a shell which two Cupids held in their outstretched arms. Renée stood for a moment at the foot of the steps, gently tapping her dress, which refused to fall properly. The courtyard, which had just been ﬁlled with the noise of the equipage, was empty again, its aristocratic silence broken only by the ceaseless murmur of the ﬂowing water. In the black mass made by the house, where the ﬁrst of the great autumn dinner-parties was presently to require the chandeliers to be lit, the bottom windows alone were illuminated, glowing brightly and casting reﬂections on the little cobblestones of the courtyard, neat and regular as a draughtboard.
  Renée pushed open the hall door and found herself face to face with her husband’s valet, who was on his way to the kitchens carrying a silver kettle. The man looked magniﬁcent, dressed all in black, tall, broad-shouldered, pale-complexioned, with the conventional side-whiskers of an English diplomat and the solemn, digniﬁed air of a judge.
‘Baptiste,’ asked Renée, ‘is Monsieur home yet?’
  ‘Yes, Madame, he’s dressing,’ replied the valet, with a movement of the head which a prince acknowledging a crowd might have envied.
  
Renée slowly climbed the staircase, pulling oﬀ her gloves.
The hall was very luxurious. There was a slight sense of suﬀocation on entering. The thick carpets that covered the ﬂoor and the stairs, and the wide red velvet hangings that concealed the walls and the doors, gave the hall the heavy silence and the slightly warm, fragrant atmosphere of a chapel. Draperies hung high, and the lofty ceiling was decorated with roses set on a lattice of golden beading. The staircase, whose double balustrade of white marble had a hand-rail covered with crimson velvet, was formed by two converging ﬂights between which, at the back, was the door to the main drawing room. On the ﬁrst landing a vast mirror ﬁlled the whole wall. Below, on marble pedestals, at the foot of the branching staircase, stood two bronze-gilt women, bare to the waist, holding great lamps set with ﬁve burners, their bright light softened by ground-glass globes. On each side was a row of wonderful majolica vases, in which rare plants were displayed.
  As Renée climbed the staircase, at each step her reﬂection in the mirror grew bigger; she wondered, with the feeling of uncertainty common to the most popular actresses, whether she was really as delightful as people told her.
  Then, when she had reached her apartment, which was on the  ﬁrst ﬂoor and overlooked the Parc Monceau, she rang for Céleste, her maid, and had herself dressed  for  dinner.  This  took  a  full  hour and a quarter. When the last pin had been inserted, she opened  a window, as the room was very warm, and, leaning on the sill, sat thinking. Behind her Céleste moved about discreetly, putting things away.
  A sea of shadow ﬁlled the gardens below. The tall, inky masses of foliage, shaken by sudden gusts of wind, swayed heavily to and fro as with the movement of the tides, the sound of their dead leaves like the lapping of waves on a pebbly beach. Now and then this ebb and ﬂow of darkness was pierced by the two yellow eyes of a carriage, appearing and disappearing between the shrubbery, along the road connecting the Avenue de la Reine-Hortense with the Boulevard Malesherbes. Before this melancholic autumnal scene, Renée felt her heart ﬁll once more with sadness. She remembered herself as a child in her father’s house, that silent house on the Île Saint-Louis, where for two centuries the Bérauds du Chatel, a family of judges, had lived sober, sombre lives. Then she thought of the suddenness of her
  
marriage, of the widower who had sold himself to become her husband and bartered his name of Rougon for that of Saccard, the two dry syllables of which, when she ﬁrst heard them, had reverberated in her ears like two rakes gathering up gold; he had taken her and cast her into this life of excess, in which her poor head was becoming more and more confused every day. Then she fell to dreaming, with childlike joy, of the pleasant games of battledore she had played with her little sister Christine so many years before. And one morning  she would awaken from the dream of pleasure she had lived in for the past ten years, mad, soiled by one of her husband’s speculations, in which he himself would go under. It came to her as a sudden foreboding. The trees sighed more loudly. Renée, distressed by these  thoughts of shame and punishment, yielded to the instincts, dormant within her, of the honest old bourgeoisie; she made a promise to the inky black night that she would change her ways, that she would spend less on clothes, seek some innocent amusement, as in her happy schooldays when the girls sang ‘Nous n’irons plus au bois’ as they danced slowly under the plane trees.
  At this moment Céleste, who had been downstairs, returned and murmured in her mistress’s ear:
  ‘Monsieur begs Madame to go down. There are already several people in the drawing room.’
  Renée shivered. She had not noticed the keen air that had frozen her shoulders. As she walked past her mirror, she stopped and glanced at herself in a habitual movement. She smiled involuntarily  and went downstairs.
  Most of the guests had, in fact, arrived. She found in the drawing room her sister Christine, a young girl of twenty, very simply dressed in white muslin; her aunt Élisabeth, the widow of Aubertot the notary, an exquisitely charming little old woman of sixty, in black satin; her husband’s sister, Sidonie Rougon, a lean, smooth-tongued woman of indeterminate age, with a complexion like soft wax, made to seem even more waxen by the dull hue of her dress; then the de Mareuils: the father, Monsieur de Mareuil, who was just out of mourning for his wife, a tall, handsome man, shallow and serious, bearing a striking resemblance to the valet Baptiste; and the daughter, poor little Louise as she was called, a child of seventeen, puny, slightly humpbacked, wearing with a sickly grace a white foulard dress with red spots; then a whole group of serious-looking men,
  
with many decorations, oﬃcial gentlemen with silent, sallow faces, and further on another group, young men with dissolute looks and low-cut waistcoats, standing round ﬁve or six ladies of extreme elegance, foremost among whom were the two inseparables, the little Marquise d’Espanet, in yellow, and the fair-haired Madame Haﬀner, in violet. Monsieur de Mussy, the horseman whose greeting Renée had not acknowledged, was there too, with the uneasy look of a  lover who feels his days are numbered. And, among the long trains spread over the carpet, two contractors, two bricklayers who had made a lot of money, Mignon and Charrier, with whom Saccard was to settle a business matter the next day, moved clumsily about in their heavy boots, hands behind their backs, most uncomfortable in their dress-clothes.
  Aristide Saccard, standing by the door, managed to greet each new arrival while holding forth to the group of serious-looking men with his southern twang and animated manner. He shook  their  hands, with a cordial word of welcome. Short and sly-looking, he bent and bowed like a puppet; and the most striking feature of his intense, cunning, swarthy little person was the red splash of his Legion of Honour ribbon, which he wore very wide.
  Renée’s entrance provoked a murmur of admiration. She was really divine. Above a tulle skirt, decorated at the back with a cascade of ﬂounces, she wore a bodice of pale-green satin bordered with English lace, caught up and fastened with large bunches of violets; a single ﬂounce adorned the front of the skirt, and bunches of violets, held together by garlands of ivy, fastened a light muslin drapery. Her head and bust appeared adorably gracious above these regal, richly elaborate petticoats. The dress was so low-cut that her nipples were almost visible, while her arms were bare and she had clusters of violets at her shoulders: she seemed to emerge quite naked from her sheath of tulle and satin, like one of those nymphs whose busts issue from sacred oaks. Her white neck and shoulders, her supple body, seemed so happy in their semi-freedom that the eye expected every moment to see the bodice and skirts slide to the ﬂoor, like the dress of a bather enraptured with her own ﬂesh. Her ﬁne blond hair, gathered up high, helmet-shaped, with a sprig of ivy through it,    and held together by a knot of violets, accentuated her nudity by uncovering the nape of her neck, which was  lightly  shaded  by  little curls, like threads of gold. She was wearing a necklace with
  
pendants, of perfect transparency and on her forehead an aigrette made of sprigs of silver set with diamonds. She stood for a few moments on the threshold, magniﬁcent in her dress, her shoulders shimmering in the hot light like watered silk. She had hurried downstairs, and was a little out of breath. Her eyes, which the darkness of the Parc Monceau had ﬁlled with shadow, blinked in the sudden ﬂood of light, giving her the hesitant look of the shortsighted, which in her was so charming.
  On seeing her, the  little  Marquise  sprang  from  her  seat,  ran  up, took her by both hands, and examining her from head to foot, murmured in ﬂuty tones:
‘You beautiful, beautiful creature...’
  Meanwhile there was much moving about; all the guests came and paid their respects to the beautiful Madame Saccard, as Renée was known to everyone. She touched hands with most of the men. Then she kissed Christine and asked after her father, who never came to the house in the Parc Monceau. Smiling, still bestowing greetings, her hands held languidly together, she stood before the circle of ladies, who gazed with great interest at the necklace and aigrette.
  The fair-haired Madame Haﬀner could no longer resist the temptation. She came closer, stared at the gems, and asked, with envy in her voice:
‘That’s the necklace and aigrette, isn’t it?’
  Renée nodded. Thereupon all the women burst into praise: the jewels were magniﬁcent, divine; then they proceeded to discuss, with admiration, Laure d’Aurigny’s sale at which Saccard had bought them for his wife; they complained that those creatures got the best of everything: soon there would be no diamonds left for respectable women. In these complaints could be discerned their longing to feel on their bare skin some of the jewellery that Tout Paris had seen on the shoulders of a celebrated courtesan, and which might perhaps whisper in their ears some of the scandals that so intrigued these great ladies. They knew about the high prices, they mentioned a gorgeous cashmere shawl and some magniﬁcent lace. The aigrette had cost ﬁfteen thousand francs, the necklace ﬁfty thousand. These ﬁgures roused Madame d’Espanet to enthusiasm. She called Saccard over, exclaiming:
‘Let me congratulate you! What a good husband you are!’ Aristide Saccard came up, bowed, and pretended to be modest.

But his grinning features betrayed his satisfaction; and he watched out of the corner of his eye the two contractors, the bricklayers who had made their fortunes, as they stood a few steps away, listening with obvious respect to the mention of such ﬁgures as ﬁfteen and ﬁfty thousand francs.
  At this moment Maxime, who had just come in, charmingly pinched in his dress-clothes, leant familiarly on his father’s shoulder and whispered to him as to a close friend, glancing in the direction of the bricklayers. Saccard wore the satisﬁed smile of an actor called before the curtain.
  More guests arrived. There were at least thirty people in the drawing room. Conversation was resumed; in moments of silence the faint clatter of silver and crockery could be heard through the walls. At last Baptiste opened the folding doors and majestically uttered the sacramental phrase:
‘Dinner is served, Madame.’
  Then, slowly, the procession formed. Saccard gave his arm to the little Marquise; Renée took the arm of an old gentleman, a senator, Baron Gouraud, before whom everyone bowed down with great humility; as to Maxime, he was obliged to oﬀer his arm to Louise de Mareuil; the other guests followed, in double ﬁle; and right at the end, the two contractors, swinging their arms.
  The dining room was a huge, square chamber, whose panelling of varnished pear-wood rose to head height and was decorated with thin gold beading. The four large panels had obviously been prepared so that they might be ﬁlled with still-life paintings; but this had never been done, the landlord doubtless having recoiled before purely artistic expenditure. They had been hung simply with dark green velvet. The chairs, curtains, and door-hangings of the same material gave the room a very sober appearance, designed to focus on the table all the splendour of the light.
  Indeed, at this hour the table, standing in the middle of the wide, dark Persian carpet which deadened the sound of footsteps, and under the glaring light of the chandelier, surrounded by chairs  whose black backs, with ﬁllets of gold, encircled it in a dark frame, seemed like an altar, like a chapel of rest, as the bright reﬂections of the crystal glass and silver plate sparkled on the dazzling whiteness of the cloth. Beyond the carved chair-backs one could just make out, in a hazy ﬂoating shadow, the wood panelling, a large low sideboard,
  
and pieces of velvet hanging here and there. The eye was naturally drawn back to the splendour of the table. A beautiful matt silver centrepiece, glittering with its chased work, stood in the middle; it represented a group of satyrs carrying oﬀ nymphs; above the group, issuing from a large horn, an enormous bouquet of real ﬂowers hung down in clusters. At each end of the table stood vases with more ﬂowers, a pair of candelabra matching the centre group, each consisting of a satyr running oﬀ with a swooning woman on one arm and holding in the other a ten-branched candlestick that added the brilliancy of its candles to the lustre of the central chandelier. Between these principal ornaments the ﬁrst dishes, large and small, were ranged symmetrically, ﬂanked by shells containing the hors d’oeuvres, and separated by porcelain bowls, crystal vases, ﬂat plates, and tall preserve-stands, ﬁlled with that portion of the dessert that was already on the table. Along the line of plates ran an army of glasses, carafes, decanters, and salt-cellars, and all this glass was as thin and light as muslin, uncut, and so transparent that it cast no shadow. The centrepiece and candelabra seemed like fountains of ﬁre; sparks glittered in the burnished silver dishes; the forks, the spoons, and the knives with mother-of-pearl handles were like bars of ﬂame; kaleidoscopic colours ﬁlled the glasses; and in the midst of this rain of light, of this mass of incandescence, the decanters threw red stains on the dazzling white cloth.
  On entering, a discreet expression of bliss spread over the faces of the men as they smiled at the ladies on their arms. The ﬂowers imparted a freshness to the heavy atmosphere. The aroma of cooked food mingled with the perfume of the roses. The sharp odour of prawns predominated, with the sour scent of lemons.
  Then, when all the guests had found their names written on the back of the menu-card, there was a noise of chairs, a great rustling of silken dresses. The bare shoulders, studded with diamonds, and separated by black coats, which served to emphasize their pallor, added their creamy whiteness to the gleam of the table. The dinner began amidst little smiles exchanged between neighbours, in a half-silence broken only by the dull clatter of spoons. Baptiste carried out his role as head waiter with his usual statesmanlike air; under his orders were, in addition to the two footmen, four assistants whom he only engaged for great dinners. As he removed each course to the end of the room and carved it at a side-table, three of the servants moved
  
noiselessly around the table, dish in hand, naming the contents in an undertone as they handed them to the guests. The others served the wine and saw to the bread and the carafes. The removes and entrées thus slowly went round and disappeared; the ladies’ pearly laughter grew no shriller.
  The guests were too numerous for the conversation to become general. Nevertheless, with the second course, when the game and side-dishes had replaced the removes and entrées, and the great wines of Burgundy, Pomard, and Chambertin succeeded the Léoville and Château-Laﬁtte, the sound of voices increased, and bursts of laughter made the thin crystal ring. Renée, seated at the middle of the table, had on her right Baron Gouraud, and on her left Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, a retired candle-manufacturer and now a municipal councillor, a director of the Crédit Viticole, and a member of the committee of inspection of the Société Générale of the Ports of Morocco, a lean, important person, whom Saccard, sitting opposite between Madame d’Espanet and Madame Haﬀner, addressed at one moment, in unctuous tones, as ‘My dear colleague’, and at another as ‘Our great administrator’. Next came the politicians: Monsieur Hupel de la Noue, a provincial prefect who spent eight months of  the year in Paris; three deputies, among whom Monsieur Haﬀner displayed his wide Alsatian face; then Monsieur de Saﬀré, a charming young man, secretary to one of the ministers; and Monsieur Michelin, the First Commissioner of Public Highways. Monsieur de Mareuil, a perpetual candidate for the Chamber of Deputies, sat square, facing the Prefect, at whom he constantly made sheep’s eyes. As to Monsieur d’Espanet, he never accompanied his wife on social occasions. The ladies of the family were placed between the most prominent of these personages. Saccard had, however, kept his sister Sidonie, whom he had placed further oﬀ, for the seat between the two contractors, Charrier on her right, Mignon on her left, as being  a position of trust in the process of conquest. Madame Michelin, the wife of the First Commissioner, a plump, pretty, dark-haired  woman, sat next to Monsieur de Saﬀré, with whom she carried on an animated conversation in a low voice. At either side of the table were the young people, auditors to the Council of State, sons of powerful fathers, budding millionaires, Monsieur de Mussy casting despairing glances at Renée, and Maxime, apparently quite charmed by Louise de Mareuil, who sat on his right. Little by little they had begun to
  
laugh very loudly. It was their end of the table that produced the ﬁrst outbursts of gaiety.
Meanwhile Monsieur Hupel de la Noue inquired courteously: ‘Shall we have the pleasure of seeing His Excellency this
evening?’
  ‘I fear not,’ answered Saccard with an air of self-importance that concealed a secret annoyance. ‘My brother is so busy. He has sent us his secretary, Monsieur de Saﬀré, with his apologies.’
  The young secretary, who was being monopolized by Madame Michelin, looked up on hearing his name, and cried out at random, thinking that he had been spoken to:
  ‘Yes, yes, there’s a Council meeting this evening at nine o’clock in the oﬃce of the Keeper of the Seals.’
  All this time Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, who had been interrupted, was holding forth, as if he were delivering a peroration amid the attentive silence of the City Council:
  ‘The results are superb. This City loan will be remembered as one of the ﬁnest ﬁnancial operations of the age. Yes, Messieurs!’
  At this point his voice was drowned once more in the laughter that broke out suddenly at one end of the table. In the midst of this outburst of merriment could be heard Maxime’s voice, as he concluded an anecdote: ‘Wait, I haven’t ﬁnished. The poor horsewoman was picked up by a road-labourer. They say she’s giving him a brilliant education so that she can marry him later on. Only her  husband, she says, shall boast of having seen a certain black mole she’s got just above her knee.’ The laughter increased; Louise laughed heartily, louder than the men. And amid this laughter, as though deaf, a footman interposed his pale, serious face between each guest, discreetly oﬀering slices of wild duck.
  Aristide was annoyed at the lack of attention paid to Monsieur Toutin-Laroche. He repeated, to show that he had been listening:
‘The City loan...’
  But Monsieur Toutin-Laroche was not a man to lose his train of thought.
  ‘Ah! Messieurs,’ he continued when the laughter had subsided, ‘yesterday was a great consolation to us, since our administration is exposed to such base attacks. They accuse the Council of leading the City to destruction, and you see, no sooner does the City issue a loan than they all bring us their money, even those who complain.’
  
 ‘You’ve worked wonders,’ said Saccard. ‘Paris has become the
capital of the world.’
  ‘Yes, it’s quite amazing,’ interjected Monsieur Hupel de la Noue. ‘Just imagine! I’ve lived in Paris all my life, and I don’t know the city any more. I got lost yesterday on my way from the Hôtel de Ville to the Luxembourg. It’s amazing, quite amazing!’
There was a pause. Everyone was listening now.
  ‘The transformation of Paris’, continued Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, ‘will be the glory of the Empire. The nation is ungrateful;  it ought to kiss the Emperor’s feet. As I said this morning in the Council meeting, when we were discussing the success of the loan: “Gentlemen, let that rabble of an Opposition say what they like; to turn Paris upside-down is to make it productive.”’ 
  Saccard smiled and closed his eyes,  as if to savour the subtlety   of the epigram. He leant behind Madame d’Espanet and said to Monsieur Hupel de la Noue, loud enough to be heard:
‘He’s wonderfully witty.’
  During this discussion of the changes being made in Paris, Charrier had been craning his neck, as if to take part in the conversation. His partner Mignon was fully occupied with Madame Sidonie. Saccard had been watching the two contractors out of the corner of his eye since the beginning of dinner.
  ‘The Government’, he said, ‘has had such strong support. Everyone has been keen to contribute to the great project. Without the  help of the wealthy companies, the city would never have made such progress.’
He turned round, and with a sort of fawning brutality said: ‘Messieurs Mignon and Charrier know something about that;
they’ve done their share of the work and they will have their share of the glory.’
  The bricklayers who had made their fortunes received this crude compliment with complacent smiles. Mignon, to whom Madame Sidonie was saying, in her mincing tones: ‘Ah, Monsieur, you ﬂatter me; no,  pink would be too young for me...’, left her in the middle   of her sentence to reply to Saccard:
‘You’re too kind; we just did our job.’
  But Charrier was not so clumsy. He drank his glass of Pomard and managed to deliver himself of a sentence:
  
  ‘The changes in Paris’, he said, ‘have given the working man a living.’
  ‘And we can add,’ resumed Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, ‘that they have given a tremendous boost to ﬁnance and industry.’
  ‘Don’t forget the artistic side: the new boulevards are quite majestic,’ added Monsieur Hupel de la  Noue,  who  prided  himself  on his taste.
  ‘Yes, yes, it’s all quite wonderful,’ murmured Monsieur de Mareuil for the sake of saying something.
  ‘As to the cost,’ declared Haﬀner, the deputy who never opened his mouth except on great occasions, ‘that will be for our children to bear, nothing could be fairer.’
  As he said this, he looked at Monsieur de Saﬀré, who appeared   to have given momentary oﬀence to the pretty Madame Michelin, and the young secretary, to show that he had been following the conversation, repeated:
‘Nothing could be fairer indeed.’
  Each member of the group of serious-looking men at the middle of the table had had his say. Monsieur Michelin, the Chief Commissioner, smiled and wagged his head; this was his usual way of taking part in a conversation: he had smiles of greeting, of response, of approval, of thanks, of leave-taking, quite a collection of smiles, which saved him almost any need to open his mouth, an arrangement which he no doubt considered more polite and more conducive to his advancement.
  One other personage had remained silent, Baron Gouraud, who was munching his food slowly like a drowsy ox. Until now he had appeared absorbed in the contemplation of his plate. Renée, who paid him every attention, received nothing in return but little grunts of satisfaction. So it was a great surprise to see him lift his head and observe, as he wiped his greasy lips:
  ‘As a landlord, whenever I have an apartment done up and painted, I raise the rent.’
  Monsieur Haﬀner’s statement: ‘The cost will be for our children to bear’, had aroused the senator. All discreetly clapped their hands, and Monsieur de Saﬀré exclaimed:
‘Ah, excellent, excellent, I must send that to the papers tomorrow.’ ‘You’re quite right, Messieurs, we live in good times,’ said Mignon,

by way of summing up, in the midst of the smiles and approving remarks provoked by the Baron’s epigram. ‘I know quite a few who have done very well out of it. You see, everything seems ﬁne when you’re making money.’
  These last words seemed to freeze the serious-looking men. The conversation stopped, and everyone tried to avoid his neighbour’s eyes. The bricklayer’s aphorism struck home, deadly as the paving-stone of La Fontaine’s bear. Michelin, who was beaming at Saccard, stopped smiling, anxious not to seem to have applied the contractor’s words to the master of the house. The latter cast a glance at Madame Sidonie, who was tackling Mignon once more, saying: ‘So you like pink, Monsieur?’ At the same time, Saccard paid an elaborate compliment to Madame d’Espanet; his swarthy, foxy face almost touched her milky shoulders as she threw herself back and tittered.
  They reached the dessert. The lackeys moved round the table at    a quicker pace. There was a pause while the cloth was covered with the remainder of the fruit and sweets. At Maxime’s end of the table the laughter increased; Louise’s shrill little voice was heard saying: ‘I assure you, Sylvia wore blue satin as Dindonnette’; and another childish voice added: ‘Yes, but the dress was trimmed with white  lace.’ The room was becoming quite hot. The ﬂushed faces seemed softened by a sense of inner contentment. Two lackeys went round the table serving Alicante and Tokay.
  Renée had seemed distracted since the beginning of dinner. She fulﬁlled her duties as hostess with a mechanical smile. At every outburst of merriment from the end of the table where Maxime and Louise sat side by side, joking like close friends, she threw a sharp glance in their direction. She felt bored. The serious-looking men were too much for her. Madame d’Espanet and Madame Haﬀner kept looking at her in despair.
  ‘What do you think of the elections?’ Saccard suddenly asked Monsieur Hupel de la Noue.
  ‘They’ll turn out very well,’ answered the latter, smiling; ‘but I haven’t had any candidates appointed as yet from my department. It seems the minister hasn’t made up his mind yet.’
  Monsieur de Mareuil, who had thanked Saccard with a glance for broaching the subject, looked as if he had stepped on hot coals. He blushed and nodded in embarrassment when the Prefect turned to him and continued:
  
   ‘I’ve heard a lot about you in the country, Monsieur. Your estates have won you many friends, and your devotion to the Emperor is well known. Your chances are excellent.’
  ‘Papa, isn’t it true that little Sylvia used to sell cigarettes in Marseilles in 1849?’ cried Maxime at this moment from the end of the table.
  Aristide Saccard pretended not to hear, and his son continued in a softer tone:
‘My father knew her extremely well.’
  This aroused suppressed laughter. Meanwhile, while  Monsieur de Mareuil kept nodding, Monsieur Haﬀner resumed in sententious tones:
  ‘Devotion to the Emperor is the only virtue, the only form of patriotism, in these days of self-interested democracy. He who loves the Emperor loves France. We would be truly delighted if Monsieur were to become our colleague.’
  ‘Monsieur will succeed,’ said Monsieur Toutin-Laroche in his turn. ‘Everyone with a fortune should gather round the throne.’
  Renée could bear it no longer. The Marquise was stiﬂing a yawn in front of her, and as Saccard was about to resume, she said to him, with her pretty smile:
‘Take pity on us, dear, and spare us your horrid politics.’
  Then Monsieur Hupel de la Noue, with a Prefect’s gallantry, exclaimed that the ladies were right, and he began to tell an indecent story of something that had happened in his town. The Marquise, Madame Haﬀner, and the other ladies laughed heartily at some of the details. The Prefect told his story in a very piquant style, with innuendoes, omissions, and vocal inﬂections that gave a very improper meaning to the most inoﬀensive expressions. Then they talked of the ﬁrst of the Duchess’s Tuesdays, of a burlesque play the night before, of the death of a poet, and of the end of the autumn racing season. Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, who had his amiable moments, drew a comparison between ladies and roses, and Monsieur de Mareuil, in the confusion in which he had been plunged by his electoral aspirations, delivered himself of some profound observations on the new fashion in bonnets. Renée continued to gaze blankly into space.
  Meanwhile the guests had stopped eating. A hot breath seemed to have passed over the table, clouding the glasses, crumbling the bread, blackening the fruit-peel on the plates, and destroying the symmetry
  
of the cloth. The ﬂowers drooped in the great horn of chased silver, and the guests sat drowsily before the remains of the dessert, lacking the energy to rise from their seats. Leaning half forward, with one arm resting on the table, they had the blank look, the general air of exhaustion, that accompanies the cautious, circumspect inebriation of men and women of fashion getting tipsy by degrees. The laughter had subsided and the chatter had ceased. Much had been drunk and eaten, and the men with decorations were more solemn than ever. In the heavy atmosphere of the room, the ladies could feel the beads of perspiration on their necks and temples. They awaited the signal to adjourn to the drawing room, serious, a little pale, as if their heads were gently swimming. Madame d’Espanet was very pink, while  Madame Haﬀner’s shoulders had assumed a waxen whiteness. Monsieur Hupel de la Noue was examining the handle of his knife; Monsieur Toutin-Laroche continued to toss disconnected sentences at Monsieur Haﬀner, who wagged his head in reply; Monsieur de Mareuil was dreaming, his eyes ﬁxed on Monsieur de Michelin, who smiled at him archly. As for the pretty Madame Michelin, she had long since stopped talking; very red in the face, she kept one hand under the table, where it was doubtless held by Monsieur de Saﬀré, who leant forward awkwardly, with knitted eyebrows and the grimace of a man solving an algebraical problem. Madame Sidonie, too, had made her conquests: Mignon and Charrier, both leaning on their elbows with their faces turned towards her, seemed enraptured to receive her conﬁdences; she confessed that she loved everything made with milk, and that she was frightened of ghosts. Aristide Saccard, his eyes half closed, sunk in the beatitude of a host who realizes that he has made his guests thoroughly drunk, had no thought of leaving the table; with respectful fondness he watched Baron Gouraud laboriously digesting his dinner, his right hand spread over the white cloth; it was the hand of a sensual old man, short, thick-set, and covered with purple blotches and short  red hairs.
  Renée mechanically ﬁnished the few drops of Tokay at the bottom of her glass. Her face tingled, her lips and nose were nervously contracted; she had the blank expression of a child who has drunk neat wine. The good bourgeois thoughts that had come to her as she sat looking at the shadows in the Parc Monceau were drowned in   the stimulation of food and wine and light, and of the disturbing
  
surroundings, impregnated with hot breath and merriment. She no longer exchanged discreet smiles with her sister Christine and her Aunt Élisabeth, both of them modest and retiring, barely uttering a word. With a stony glance she had made poor Monsieur de Mussy lower his eyes. Though her thoughts seemed elsewhere, and she carefully refrained from turning round, leaning back in her chair, against which the satin of her bodice rustled gently, her shoulders betrayed a slight tremor with each fresh burst of laughter from the corner where Maxime and Louise were still making merry, as loudly as ever, amid the dying buzz of conversation.
  Behind her, half in shadow, his tall ﬁgure beetling over the disordered table and the torpid guests, stood Baptiste, pale and solemn, with the scornful attitude of a ﬂunkey who has gorged his masters. He alone, in the alcohol-laden atmosphere, beneath the bright light of the chandelier which was turning to yellow, remained correct, with his silver neckchain, his cold eyes in which the sight of the women’s shoulders kindled no spark, and his air of a eunuch waiting on Parisians of the decadence and retaining his dignity.
  At last Renée rose, with a nervous movement. All followed her example. They adjourned to the drawing room, where coﬀee was served.
  The drawing room was long and vast, a sort of gallery that ran from one pavilion to the other, taking up the whole of the façade on the garden side. A large French window opened on to the steps. This gallery glittered with gold. The ceiling, gently curved, had fanciful scrolls winding round great gilt medallions that shone like bucklers. Roses and dazzling garlands encircled the arch; ﬁllets of gold, like threads of molten metal, ran round the walls, framing the panels, which were hung with red silk; festoons of roses, topped with tufts of full-blown blossoms, hung down along the sides of the mirrors. An Aubusson carpet spread its purple ﬂowers over the polished ﬂoor. The furniture of red silk damask, the door-hangings and window-curtains of the same material, the huge ormolu clock on the mantel-piece, the porcelain vases standing on the consoles, the legs of the two long tables inlaid with Florentine mosaic, the very ﬂower-stands placed in the window recesses, oozed and sweated with gold. In each corner of the room was a great lamp placed on a pedestal of red marble, and fastened to it by chains of bronze gilt that fell with symmetrical grace. From the ceiling hung three chandeliers with
  
crystal pendants, streaming with drops of blue and pink light, whose hot glare made all the gold in the room shine even more brightly.
  The men soon withdrew to the smoking room. Monsieur de Mussy went up to Maxime and took him familiarly by the arm; he had known him at school, though he was six years his senior. He led him out to the terrace, and after they had lighted their cigars he began to complain bitterly about Renée.
  ‘Can you tell me what’s the matter with her? I saw her yesterday and she was charming, but today she’s behaving as if it was all over between us. What have I done? It would be really nice of you, my dear Maxime, if you would ask her, and tell her how much I’m suﬀering because of her.’
  ‘Oh, I couldn’t do that!’ replied Maxime, laughing. ‘Renée’s nerves are very bad, and I’m not prepared to create a storm, Monsieur. You’ll have to settle your diﬀerences yourselves.’
And he added, after puﬃng slowly on his Havana: ‘You want me to do you a favour, don’t you?’
  Monsieur de Mussy spoke of the sincerity of his friendship, and declared that he was only waiting for an opportunity to give Maxime proof of his devotion. He was very unhappy, he was so deeply in love with Renée!
  ‘Very well then, I will,’ said Maxime at last. ‘I’ll speak to her, but I can’t promise anything, you know: she’s bound to tell me to get lost.’ They went back to the smoking room and stretched out in two great lounging-chairs. There, for at least half an hour, Monsieur de Mussy related his sorrows to Maxime; he told him for the tenth time how he had fallen in love with his stepmother, how she had condescended to notice him; and Maxime, while ﬁnishing his cigar, oﬀered him advice, explaining Renée’s personality to him and
suggesting how he should behave in order to win her heart.
  Saccard came and sat down within a few paces of the young men. Monsieur de Mussy remained silent, while Maxime concluded by saying:
‘If I were you, I’d be very direct with her. She likes that.’
  The smoking room was at the end of the long gallery, one of the round rooms formed by the turrets. It was ﬁtted up very richly and soberly. Hung with imitation Cordovan leather, it had Algerian curtains and door-hangings, and a velvet-pile Persian carpet. The furniture, upholstered in maroon-coloured shagreen leather, consisted of
  
ottomans, easy chairs, and a circular divan that ran round part of the room. The miniature chandelier, the ornaments on the table, and the ﬁre irons were of pale-green Florentine bronze.
  A few of the younger men remained behind with the ladies, together with some older men with pale, ﬂabby faces, who loathed tobacco. The smoking room was ﬁlled with noise and laughter. Monsieur Hupel de la Noue amused his fellow guests by repeating the story he had told at dinner, embellished with bawdy details. This was his speciality: he had two versions of every anecdote, one for the ladies and the other for the men. When Aristide came in he was surrounded and complimented; and as he pretended not to understand, Monsieur de Saﬀré told him, with a warmly applauded  phrase, that he had served his country well by preventing the fair Laure d’Aurigny from falling into the hands of the English.
  ‘No, really, Messieurs, you’re mistaken,’ stammered Saccard, with false modesty.
  ‘Go on, there’s no need to apologize,’ cried Maxime humorously. ‘It was a splendid thing to do at your age.’
  The young man, who had just thrown away his cigar, went back to the drawing room. A great many people had arrived. The gallery was full of dress-coats, standing up and talking in low tones, and of petticoats spread out wide along the settees. Flunkeys had begun to move about with silver salvers loaded with ices and glasses of punch. Maxime, who wanted to speak to Renée, walked the full length of the drawing room, knowing from experience the ladies’ favourite sanctum. At the opposite end to the smoking room, to which it formed a pendant, there was another circular chamber, which had been made into an adorable little drawing room. With its hangings, curtains, and portières of buttercup satin, it had a strangely voluptuous charm. The lights of the chandelier, a piece of very delicate workmanship, sang a symphony in pale yellow, amid the sun-coloured silks. The eﬀect resembled a ﬂood of softened rays, as of the sun setting over a ﬁeld of ripe wheat. The light expired upon the ﬂoor on an Aubusson carpet strewn with dead leaves. An ebony piano inlaid with ivory, two cabinets whose glass doors displayed a host of knick-knacks, a Louis XVI table, and a ﬂower bracket heaped high with blossoms furnished the room. The settees, the easy chairs, and the ottomans were covered in quilted buttercup satin, divided at intervals by wide black-satin bands embroidered with gaudy tulips.
  
There were also two low seats, some occasional chairs, and every variety of stool, elegant and bizarre. The woodwork of the furniture could not be seen: the satin and the quilting covered everything. The curved backs had the soft fullness of bolsters. They were like beds  in whose down one could sleep and make love amid the sensual symphony in pale yellow.
  Renée loved this little room, one of whose glass doors opened into the magniﬁcent hothouse at the side of the house. It was here, in the daytime, that she spent her leisure hours. The yellow hangings, far from extinguishing her fair hair, gave it a strange golden radiance; her head stood out pink and white amid the glimmer of dawn like that of a blonde Diana awakening in the morning light; and it was doubtless because it threw her beauty into such relief that she loved this room so much.
  Now she was there with her closest friends. Her sister and aunt had just taken their leave. Only the empty-headed remained in the sanctum. Half thrown back on a settee, Renée was listening to the conﬁdences of her friend Adeline, who was whispering in her ear with kittenish airs and sudden bursts of laughter. Suzanne Haﬀner was greatly sought after; she was holding her own against a group of young men who stood very close to her, displaying her Germanic languour, her provocative eﬀrontery, cold and bare like her shoulders. In a corner Madame Sidonie was quietly instilling her precepts into the mind of a young married woman with Madonna-like lashes. Further oﬀ stood Louise, talking to a tall, shy young man, who was blushing; while Baron Gouraud dozed in his easy chair in the full light, spreading out his ﬂabby ﬂesh, his pale, elephantine form in the midst of the ladies’ frail grace and silken daintiness. A fairy-like light fell in a golden shower over the room, on the satin skirts with folds as hard and gleaming as porcelain, on the ladies’ shoulders, whose milky whiteness was spangled with diamonds. A ﬂuty voice, a laugh like a pigeon’s cooing, rang out with crystal clarity. It was very warm. Fans beat slowly like birds’ wings, their regular movements spreading with each stroke into the languid air the musked perfume of the bodices.
  When Maxime appeared in the doorway, Renée, who was listening distractedly to the Marquise’s stories, rose hastily as if to attend to her duties as a hostess. She went into the large drawing room, where the young man followed her. She took a few steps, smiling, shaking
  
hands with people, and then, drawing Maxime aside, whispered ironically:
  ‘Well! The burden seems a pleasant one; you obviously don’t ﬁnd it too much of a bother to do your own wooing.’
  ‘I don’t understand,’ replied Maxime, who had come to plead on behalf of Monsieur de Mussy.
‘But it seems to me that I did well not to save you from Louise.
You’re not losing any time, you two.’
And she added, with a note of reproach:
‘It was indecent to go on like that at dinner.’ Maxime began to laugh.
  ‘Ah yes, we were telling each other stories. I didn’t know the little minx. She’s rather amusing. She’s like a boy.’
  As Renée continued to wear an expression of prudish annoyance, the young man, who had never known her to show such indignation, resumed with his tone of urbane familiarity:
  ‘Do you imagine, stepmamma, that I pinched her knees under the table? Damn it, I know how to behave with my future wife!... I want to talk about something serious... Listen... Are you listening?’
He lowered his voice still more.
  ‘It’s that... Monsieur de Mussy is very unhappy. He just told me so. You know, it’s not for me to bring you together, if you’ve had an argument. But, you see, I knew him at school, and as he really seemed in despair I promised to put in a word for him.’
He stopped. Renée was looking at him very strangely.
  ‘You won’t answer?’ he continued. ‘No matter, I’ve delivered my message, and you can sort things out as you please. But I do think you’re being rather cruel. I felt sorry for the poor fellow. If I were you, I would at least send him a kind word.’
  Then Renée, who had kept her glittering eyes ﬁxed ﬁrmly on Maxime, said:
‘Tell Monsieur de Mussy that I ﬁnd him very boring!’
  She resumed her slow walk among the guests, smiling and shaking hands with people. Maxime stood where he was, looking surprised; then he laughed silently to himself.
  Since he was not eager to deliver his message to Monsieur de Mussy, he strolled round the large drawing room. The reception was drawing to a close, marvellous and commonplace, like all receptions. It was almost midnight; the guests were leaving one by one. Not
  
wishing to go home to bed on an unpleasant note, Maxime decided to look for Louise. He was walking past the entrance-door when he saw, standing in the hall, the pretty Madame Michelin, whom her husband was wrapping up gently in a blue-and-pink cloak.
  ‘He was charming, quite charming,’ she was saying. ‘We talked about you all through dinner. He’ll speak to the minister, though it’s not up to him.’
  A footman, next to them, was helping Baron Gouraud on with a great fur coat. ‘That’s the old boy who could see the thing through!’ she added in her husband’s ear, as he tied the ribbon of her hood under her chin. ‘He can do anything he likes with the minister. Tomorrow, at the de Mareuils’, I must see what...’
  Monsieur Michelin smiled. He carried his wife oﬀ carefully, as if he had something valuable and fragile under his  arm.  Maxime,  after glancing round to make sure that Louise was not in the hall,  went straight to the small drawing room. She  was  still  there,  though not quite alone, waiting for her father, who had spent the evening in the smoking room with the politicians. The ladies, the Marquise, and Madame Haﬀner had left. Only Madame Sidonie remained, explaining to some oﬃcials’ wives how fond she was of animals.
  ‘Ah! Here’s my husband,’ cried Louise. ‘Sit here and tell me where my father has fallen asleep. He must have dreamt that he was in the Chamber.’
  Maxime replied in similar vein, and the two young people began laughing loudly again as at dinner. Sitting on a very low stool at her feet, he ended by taking her hands and playing with her as with a schoolfriend. In fact, in her frock of white foulard with red dots, with her high-cut bodice, her ﬂat chest, and her ugly, cunning little urchin’s face, she might have passed for a boy dressed as a girl. Yet at times her puny arms, her distorted form, would assume a pose of abandonment, and her eyes, still quite innocent, would sparkle; but not the slightest blush was brought to her cheek by Maxime’s playfulness. They laughed again, thinking themselves alone, not seeing Renée, who stood half hidden in the middle of the hothouse, watching them from a distance.
  A moment before, as she was crossing a little pathway, the sight of Maxime and Louise had suddenly made Renée stop behind a shrub. Around her the hothouse, like the nave of a church with a domed
  
glass roof supported by slender iron columns, displayed its  rich vegetation, its mass of lush greenery, its spreading rockets of foliage. In the middle, in an oval tank level with the ground, lived, with the mysterious sea-green life of water-plants, all the aquatic ﬂora of the tropics. Cyclanthus plants, with their streaks of variegated green, formed a monumental girdle round the fountain, which looked like the truncated capital of some cyclopean column. At each end two tall tornelias reared their strange brushwood above the water, their dry, bare stems contorted like agonized serpents, and let fall roots that seemed like a ﬁsherman’s nets hung up in the air. Near the edge a Javanese pandanus spread its cluster of green leaves streaked with white, thin as swords, prickly and fretted as Malay krises. On the surface, in the warmth of the tepid sheet of slumbering water, great water-lilies opened out their pink petals, and euryales trailed their round, leprous leaves, ﬂoating on the surface like the backs of
monstrous, blistered toads.
  By way of turf, a broad edging of selaginella encircled the tank. This dwarf fern formed a thick mossy carpet of light green. Beyond the great circular path, four enormous clusters of plants shot up to the roof: palms, drooping gently in their elegance, spreading their fans, displayed their rounded crowns, hung down their leaves like oars wearied by their perpetual voyage through the blue; tall Indian bamboos rose upwards, hard, slender, dropping from on high their light shower of leaves; a ravenala, the traveller’s tree, erected its foliage like enormous Chinese screens; and in a corner a banana tree, loaded with fruit, stretched out on all sides its long horizontal leaves, on which two lovers might easily recline in each other’s arms. In the corners were Abyssinian euphorbias, deformed prickly cactuses covered with hideous excrescences, oozing with poison. Beneath the trees the ground was carpeted with creeping ferns, adianta and pterides, their fronds outlined daintily like ﬁne lace. Alsophilas of a taller species tapered upwards with their rows of symmetrical branches, hexagonal, so regular that they looked like large pieces of porcelain made specially for the fruit of some gigantic dessert. The shrubs were surrounded by a border of begonias and caladiums: begonias with twisted leaves, gorgeously streaked with red and green; caladiums whose spear-headed leaves, white with green veins, looked like large butterﬂy wings; bizarre plants whose foliage lives strangely, with the sombre or wan splendour of poisonous ﬂowers.
  
Behind the shrubbery, a second, narrower pathway ran round the
hothouse. There, on little terraces, half concealing the hot-water pipes, bloomed marantas, soft as velvet to the touch, gloxinias, purple-belled, and dracoenas that looked like blades of old lacquer.
  But one of the charms of this winter garden was the four alcoves of greenery at each corner, spacious arbours enclosed by thick curtains of creepers. Patches of virgin forest had here erected their leafy walls, their impenetrable mass of stems, of supple shoots that clung to the branches, shot through space in reckless ﬂight, and fell from the domed roof like tassels of ornate drapery. A stalk of vanilla, whose ripe pods gave oﬀ a pungent perfume, trailed round a moss-grown portico; Indian berries draped the thin pillars with  their  round leaves; bauhinias with their red clusters, quisqualias with ﬂowers pendant like bead necklaces glided, twined, and intertwined like adders, endlessly playing and slithering amid the darkness of the undergrowth.
  Under arches placed here and there between the shrubs hung baskets suspended from wire chains, and ﬁlled with orchids, fantastic plants of the air, which pushed in every direction their crooked tendrils, bent and twisted like the limbs of cripples. There were cypripediums, whose ﬂowers resemble a wonderful slipper with a heel adorned with a dragonﬂy’s wings; aerides, so delicately scented; stanhopeas, with pale tiger ﬂowers, which exhale from afar a strong and acrid breath, as from the putrid mouths of convalescent invalids. But what most struck the eye from every point of the pathways was a great Chinese hibiscus, whose immense expanse of foliage and ﬂowers covered the whole wall on which the hothouse was built. The huge purple ﬂowers of this giant mallow live for just a few hours. They resembled, it might have been imagined, the eager, sensual mouths of women, the red lips, soft and moist, of some colossal Messalina, bruised by kisses, and constantly renewed, with their
hungry, bleeding smiles.
  Renée, standing by the tank, shivered in the midst of this lush magniﬁcence. Behind her, a great sphinx in black marble, crouched on a block of granite, turned its head towards the fountain with a cat’s cruel and wary smile; and with its polished haunches it looked like the dark idol of this tropical setting. From globes of ground  glass came a light that covered the leaves with milky stains. Statues, women’s heads with bare necks, swelling with laughter, stood out
  
white against the shrubbery, patches of shadow distorting the mad gaiety on their faces. Strange rays of light played on the dull, still water of the tank, throwing up vague shapes,  glaucous  masses  with monstrous outlines. A ﬂood of white light streamed over the ravenela’s glossy leaves and over the lacquered fans of the latanias, while from the lacework of the ferns drops of light fell in a ﬁne shower. Above shone the reﬂections from the glass roof, between the sombre tops of the tall palm trees. All around was massed in darkness; the arbours, with their curtains of creepers, were covered in shadow, like the lairs of sleeping serpents.
  Renée stood musing beneath the bright light, watching Louise   and Maxime in the distance. She no longer felt the ﬂeeting fancies, the twilight temptations of the chilly avenues of the Bois. Her thoughts were no longer lulled to sleep by the trot of her horses along the fashionable turf, among the glades in which bourgeois families take their lunch on their Sunday excursions. This time she was ﬁlled with a keen, speciﬁc desire.
  Endless love and voluptuous appetite pervaded this stiﬂing nave  in which seethed the ardent sap of the tropics. Renée was wrapped in the powerful bridals of the earth that gave birth to these dark growths, these colossal stamina; and the acrid birth-throes of this hotbed, of this forest growth, of this mass of vegetation aglow with the entrails that nourished it, surrounded her with  disturbing  odours. At her feet was the steaming tank, its tepid water thickened by the sap from the ﬂoating roots, enveloping her shoulders with a mantle of heavy vapours, forming a mist that warmed her skin like the touch of a hand moist with desire. Overhead she could smell the palm trees, whose tall leaves shook down their aroma. And more than the stiﬂing heat, more than the brilliant light, more than the great dazzling ﬂowers, like faces laughing or grimacing between the leaves, it was the odours that overwhelmed her. An indescribable perfume, potent, exciting, composed of a thousand diﬀerent perfumes, hung about her; human exudation, the breath of women, the scent of hair; and breezes sweet and swooningly faint were blended with breezes coarse and pestilential, laden with poison. But amid this strange music of odours, the dominant melody that constantly returned, stiﬂing the sweetness of the vanilla and the orchids’ pungency, was the penetrating, sensual smell of ﬂesh, the smell of lovemaking escaping in the early morning from the bedroom of newlyweds.
  
Renée sank back slowly, leaning against the granite pedestal. In her green satin dress, her head and breast covered with the liquid glitter of her diamonds, she was like a great ﬂower, green and pink, one of the water-lilies in the tank, swooning from the heat. In this moment of insight all her new resolutions vanished, the intoxication of dinner returned, imperious, triumphant, strengthened by the ﬂames of the hothouse. She thought no longer of the soothing freshness of the night, of the murmuring shadows of the gardens, whose voices had whispered to her of the bliss of serenity. In her were aroused the senses of a woman who desires, the caprices of a woman who is satiated. Above her head, the black marble sphinx laughed its mysterious laugh, as if it had read the longing, formulated at last, that had stirred her dead heart, the elusive longing, the ‘something diﬀerent’ she had vainly sought in the rocking of her barouche, in  the ﬁne ash of twilight, and now suddenly revealed to her beneath the dazzling light of this blazing garden by the sight of Maxime and Louise, laughing and playing, their hands interlocked.
  The sound of voices suddenly came from an adjacent arbour into which Aristide Saccard had led Mignon and Charrier.
  ‘No, Monsieur Saccard,’ said the latter’s coarse voice, ‘we really can’t take it back for more than two hundred francs a metre.’
Saccard’s shrill tones retorted:
  ‘But in my share you valued each metre of frontage at two hundred and ﬁfty francs.’
‘Well, listen, we’ll make it two hundred and twenty-ﬁve francs.’
  The voices continued, sounding coarse and strange under the clumps of drooping palm trees. But they passed like an empty noise through Renée’s dream, as there rose before her, with the fatal lure experienced by someone looking over a precipice, an unknown pleasure, hot with crime, more violent than all those she had already tasted, the last that remained in her cup. She felt weary no longer.
  The shrub that half concealed her was a malignant plant, a Madagascan tanghin tree with wide, box-like leaves with whitish stems, whose smallest veins distilled a venomous ﬂuid. At a moment when Louise and Maxime laughed more loudly in the reﬂected yellow light of the sunset in the little boudoir, Renée, her mind wandering, her mouth dry and parched, took between her lips a sprig of the tanghin tree that was level with her mouth, and sank her teeth into one of its bitter leaves.
  


CHAPTER II

Aristide Rougon swooped down on Paris the day after 2 December, like a bird of prey scenting the ﬁeld of battle from afar. He came from Plassans, a sub-prefecture in the south of France, where his father, in the recent political upheaval, had at last secured a long-coveted appointment as receiver of taxes. He himself, still young, had compromised himself like a fool, gaining neither fame nor fortune, and considered himself fortunate to have emerged safe and sound from the fray. He came in a great hurry, furious at having taken  a wrong turn, cursing the provinces, talking of Paris with the ravenous hunger of a wolf, swearing ‘that he would never be such a fool again’; and his bitter smile as he said these words assumed a terrible signiﬁcance on his thin lips.
  He arrived in the early days of 1852. He brought with him his wife Angèle, an insipid, fair-haired person, whom he installed in cramped lodgings in the Rue Saint-Jacques like an inconvenient piece of furniture of which he was eager to rid himself. His young wife had refused to be separated from her daughter, little Clotilde, a child of four, whom Aristide would gladly have left behind in the care of his family. But he had only agreed to Angèle’s wish on condition that the school in Plassans should continue to provide a roof for their son Maxime, a mischievous boy of eleven whose grandmother had promised to look after him. Aristide wanted to have his hands free: a wife and child already seemed to him a huge burden for a man determined to overcome every obstacle, not caring whether he fell ﬂat on his face or broke his back in his attempt to succeed.
  On the very evening of his arrival, while Angèle was unpacking the trunks, he felt a keen desire to explore Paris, to tread with his clodhopping country shoes the burning stones from which he hoped to extract millions. He took possession of the city. He walked for the sake of walking, marching along the pavements as if he were in some conquered country. He saw very clearly the battle that lay ahead, and was happy to compare himself to a skilful picklock who, by cunning or violence, was about to seize his share of the common wealth which so far had been cruelly denied him. Had he felt the need for an excuse, he would have invoked his desires, which for the last ten
  
years had been stiﬂed, his miserable provincial existence, and above all his mistakes, for which he held society at large responsible. But at this moment, ﬁlled with the excitement of the gambler who at last places his hands on the green baize, he felt only joy, a special joy in which were mingled anticipation of satisﬁed greed and unpunished roguery. The Paris air intoxicated him; he thought he could hear in the rumbling of the carriages the voices from Macbeth calling to him: ‘Thou shalt be rich!’ For nearly two hours he walked the streets, tasting the delights of a man who freely indulges his vices. He had not been in Paris since the happy year he had spent there as a student. Night was falling: the bright light thrown on the pavements by the shops and cafés intensiﬁed his dreams. He no longer knew where he was.
  When he looked up he found he was in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, near the middle. One of his brothers, Eugène Rougon, lived in an adjacent street, the Rue Penthièvre. When deciding to come to Paris, Aristide had reckoned particularly on Eugène who, having been one of the main participants in the coup d’état, was now a highly inﬂuential ﬁgure, a lawyer of little account about to become a politician of great importance. But with a gambler’s superstition, Aristide decided not to knock at his brother’s door that evening. He returned slowly to the Rue Saint-Jacques, thinking of Eugène with a dull feeling of jealousy, contemplating his shabby clothes still covered with the dust of the journey, and seeking consolation in his dream of wealth. But even this dream had turned to bitterness. Having set out in an expansive mood, exhilarated by the bustle of the Paris shops, he returned home irritated by the happiness that  seemed to ﬁll the streets, his avidity intensiﬁed, picturing to himself violent struggles in which he would take delight in beating and cheating the crowd that had jostled him on the pavement. Never had his appetite for success and pleasure been so keen.
  At daybreak the next morning he was at his brother’s. Eugène lived in two large, cold, barely furnished rooms that chilled Aristide to the bone. He had expected to ﬁnd his brother wallowing in the lap of luxury. Eugène was working at a small black table. All he said, with a smile, in his slow voice, was:
‘Ah! there you are, I was expecting you.’
  Aristide was very bitter. He accused Eugène of leaving him to vegetate, of not even having the kindness to give him a word of
  
good advice while he was ﬂoundering about in the country. He could never forgive himself for remaining a Republican until  December; it was an open sore with him, a source of endless embarrassment. Eugène had quietly taken up his pen. When his brother had ﬁnished, he said:
  ‘Bah! All mistakes can be put right. You’ve got a promising career ahead of you.’
  He uttered these words so emphatically, and with such a piercing look, that Aristide bowed his head, feeling that his brother could read his mind. The latter continued with aﬀable bluntness:
  ‘You’ve come to ask me to ﬁnd you a position, haven’t you? I’ve been thinking of you, but I haven’t heard of anything yet. You know I must be careful where I put you. What you want is a position in which you can feather your nest without any risk of danger to either of us. Don’t bother to argue, we’re quite alone, we can say what we like...’ Aristide thought it best to laugh.
  ‘Oh, I know how clever you are,’ Eugène continued, ‘and that you’re not likely to make a fool of yourself very easily. As soon as there’s a good opportunity, I’ll give you a position. In the meantime, whenever you want twenty francs or so, come and ask me.’
  They talked for a while about the uprising in the south, which had given their father his appointment as receiver of taxes. Eugène dressed while they were talking. As he was about to take leave of his brother downstairs in the street, he detained him a moment longer, and said to him softly:
  ‘Do me the favour of not looking for work on your own account; just wait at home quietly for the appointment I promise you. I wouldn’t like to see my brother hanging about in people’s waiting rooms.’
  Aristide had a certain respect for Eugène, whom he regarded as someone quite exceptional. He could not forgive his lack of trust, or his bluntness, which was a triﬂe excessive; but he went home obediently and shut himself away in the Rue Saint-Jacques. He had  arrived with ﬁve hundred francs, which had been lent by his wife’s father. After paying for the journey, he made the three hundred francs that remained last him a month. Angèle was a great eater; moreover she thought it necessary to trim her Sunday dress with a fresh set of mauve ribbons. That month of waiting seemed endless to Aristide. He was consumed with impatience. When he sat at the window and watched the teeming life of Paris beneath him, he was
  
seized by an insane desire to hurl himself into the furnace in order to mould the gold like soft wax with his fevered hands. He inhaled the breath, vague as yet, that rose from the great city, the breath of the budding Empire, laden already with the odours of alcoves and ﬁnancial deals, with the warm smell of sensuality. The faint traces that reached him told him that he was on the right scent, that the prey was scudding before him, that the great Imperial hunt, the hunt for adventure, women, and fortunes, was about to begin. His nostrils quivered, his instinct, the instinct of a starving animal, seized unerringly on the slightest indications of the division of the spoil of which the city was to be the arena.
  Twice he called on his brother to urge him to greater eﬀort on his behalf. Eugène received him gruﬄy, told him that he was not forgetting him, that he must be patient. At last he received a letter asking him to call at the Rue Penthièvre. He went, his heart pounding, as if he were on his way to an assignation. He found Eugène sitting, as ever, at his little black table in the big chilly room he used as a study. As soon as he saw him the lawyer handed him a document and said: ‘Here, I got this yesterday. This is your appointment as assistant surveying-clerk at the Hôtel de Ville. Your salary will be two thousand
four hundred francs.’
  Aristide had remained standing. He turned pale and did not take the document, thinking that his brother was making fun of him. He had expected a salary of at least six thousand francs. Eugène, guessing what was going through his mind, turned his chair round and, folding his arms, exclaimed angrily:
  ‘So you’re a fool then, are you? You just dream like a girl. You want to live in a grand apartment, keep servants, eat well, sleep in silk sheets, and take your pleasure in the arms of the ﬁrst woman who comes along in a boudoir furnished in two hours. You  and   your sort, if we let you, would empty the coﬀers before they’re   even full. Why on earth can’t you be patient? Look how I live; if  you want to pick up a fortune you might at least take the trouble to bend down.’
  He spoke with profound contempt for his brother’s schoolboy impatience. One could feel through his harsh words a higher ambition, a desire for limitless power; Aristide’s craving for money must have seemed vulgar and puerile to him. He continued in a softer tone, with a subtle smile:
  
  ‘I’m sure you have the best intentions, and I have no wish to hold you back. Men like you are valuable to us. We intend to choose our friends from among the hungriest. Don’t worry, we’ll keep open table, and the biggest appetites will be satisﬁed. After all, it’s the easiest way to govern. But for heaven’s sake wait until the table is laid; and if you take my advice, you’ll go to the kitchen yourself and fetch your own knife and fork.’
  Aristide still said nothing. His brother’s colourful language failed to raise his spirits. Eugène again gave vent to his anger.
  ‘Ah!’ he exclaimed. ‘I was right to begin with: you’re a fool... What did you expect? What did you imagine I was going to do with you? You haven’t even ﬁnished your law studies; you bury yourself for ten years in a miserable clerkship in a sub-prefecture; and you turn up on my doorstep with the odious reputation of a Republican only converted by the coup d’état. Do you think you could become a minister with a record like that? I know you’re determined to succeed at any cost. That’s a great quality, I admit, and it’s what I had in mind when I got you this position at the Hôtel de Ville.’
  He stood up, thrust the nomination into Aristide’s hands, and continued:
  ‘Take it, and one day you’ll thank me! I chose the position myself, and I know what you’ll be able to get out of it. All you have to do is keep your ears open. If you keep your wits about you, you’ll understand and act accordingly. Remember this: we’re entering a period when anyone who wants to will be able to get rich. Make as much money as you like: you have my permission; but if you do anything stupid or create a scandal, I’ll destroy you.’
  This threat produced the eﬀect that his promises had been unable to bring about. Aristide’s enthusiasm was rekindled at the thought of the riches of which his brother spoke. He felt that he was at last being unleashed into the fray, authorized to cut throats, provided  that he did so legally and without causing too much trouble. Eugène gave him two hundred francs to keep him going until the end of the month. Then he fell into a pensive mood:
  ‘I’m thinking of changing my name,’ he said at last. ‘You should do the same. It would help us not to get in each other’s way.’
‘As you like,’ murmured Aristide.
‘There’s nothing you need to do, I’ll take care of the formalities.
Would you like to call yourself Sicardot, your wife’s name?’

Aristide raised his eyes to the ceiling and repeated the name,
listening to the sound of the syllables:
  ‘Sicardot... Aristide Sicardot... No, I wouldn’t; it’s clumsy and stinks of failure.’
‘Think of something else then,’ said Eugène.
  ‘I’d prefer Sicard simply,’ resumed Aristide after a pause. ‘Aristide Sicard... that’s not bad, is it? A bit frivolous, perhaps.’
He thought a moment longer and then cried triumphantly:
  ‘I’ve got it... Saccard, Aristide Saccard... with two c’s... Eh! there’s money in that name; it sounds as if you’re counting ﬁve-franc pieces.’
  Eugène had a crude sense of humour. He dismissed his brother, remarking with a smile:
  ‘Yes, it’s a name that will make you either a crook or a millionaire.’ A few days later Aristide Saccard was installed at the Hôtel de Ville. It became clear that his brother had used all his inﬂuence to get
him admitted without the usual examinations.
  The household now settled into the monotonous life of a minor clerk. Aristide and his wife resumed their Plassans habits. Their dream of immediate wealth had evaporated, and their poverty-stricken existence seemed all the more oppressive to them because they had come to regard it as a probationary period of indeterminate length. To be poor in Paris is to be doubly poor. Angèle accepted penury with dull passivity; she spent her days in the kitchen, or lying on the ﬂoor playing with her daughter, never complaining until their money ran out. But Aristide quivered with rage at this state of poverty, at this pinched existence, in which he paced about like a caged animal. For him it was a period of unspeakable suﬀering; his pride was cut to the quick, his unsatisﬁed cravings drove him mad. His brother succeeded in getting elected to the Corps Législatif by the arrondissement of Plassans, and he suﬀered all the more. He was too conscious of Eugène’s superiority to be jealous: he accused him of not doing as much as he might have done for him. Several times he was driven by necessity to call on him to borrow money. Eugène lent him the money, but reproached him for his lack of spirit and determination. After that Aristide strengthened his resolve. He  swore he would never ask anybody for a sou, and he kept his word. The last week of each month Angèle ate dry bread and sighed. This apprenticeship completed Saccard’s gruesome education. His lips
  
became even thinner; he was no longer fool enough to dream of millions aloud; his wiry body became almost emaciated, and expressed but one desire. When he trotted from the Rue Saint-Jacques to the Hôtel de Ville, his worn heels resounded on the pavement, and he buttoned himself up in his threadbare overcoat as in an asylum of hatred, while his weasel-like nose sniﬀed the air of the streets: an angular symbol of envy and poverty prowling the streets of Paris, dreaming of wealth and pleasure.
  Early in 1853 Aristide was appointed a surveying-clerk. His salary was to be four thousand ﬁve hundred francs. This increase came just in time: Angèle’s health was failing, little Clotilde had lost all her colour. He kept his poky lodgings of two small rooms, the dining  room furnished in walnut and the bedroom in mahogany, and continued to lead a harsh existence, avoiding debt, not wishing to touch other people’s money until he could plunge his arms into it up to his elbows. He thus denied his instincts, scorning the few extra sous    he received, remaining on the lookout. Angèle was perfectly happy. She bought herself some new clothes and ate meat every day. She could no longer understand her husband’s suppressed anger, nor the reason why he wore the sombre expression of a man trying to solve some huge problem.
  Aristide followed Eugène’s advice: he kept his ears and eyes open. When he went to thank his brother for his promotion, the latter noticed how he had changed; he complimented him on what he called his good manners. The clerk, hardened by jealousy, had acquired a supple, insinuating style. Within a few months he had transformed himself into an accomplished actor. All his southern ardour had been aroused; and he had become so adept at deception that his fellow clerks at the Hôtel de Ville regarded him as a good sort whose family connection with a deputy marked him out for some plum appointment. This connection also earned him the goodwill of his superiors. He thus enjoyed a sort of authority above his station, which enabled him to open certain doors and examine  certain ﬁles without any suspicion being attached to his indiscretion. For two years he was seen wandering round the corridors, lingering in all the rooms, leaving his desk twenty times a day to go and talk to a friend, or deliver a message, or take a stroll through the oﬃces – endless little trips that made his colleagues exclaim: ‘That wretched Provençal! He can’t sit still: he’s got ants in his pants.’ His friends
  
took him for an idler, and he laughed when they accused him of having but one thought, to cheat their bosses of a few minutes. He never made the mistake of listening at keyholes; but he had a way of boldly opening a door and walking through a room, with a document in his hand and a preoccupied air, and with a step so slow and measured that he did not miss a word of the conversation. It was a masterpiece of tactics; people stopped bothering to fall silent when this conscientious clerk passed by, gliding through the shadows of the oﬃces and seeming so wrapped up in his work. He had one other method: he was extraordinarily obliging, he oﬀered to help his fellow clerks whenever they fell behind with their work, and he would then study with great care and attention the account books and documents that passed through his hands. But one of his favourite tricks was to strike up friendships with the messengers. He went so far as to shake hands with them. For hours at a stretch he would keep them talking with stiﬂed little bursts of laughter, telling them stories, inducing them to take him into their conﬁdence. They worshipped him, and said of him: ‘There’s a man who doesn’t take himself too seriously.’ He was the ﬁrst to be told of any scandal. So it came about that after two years the Hôtel de Ville was an open book to him. He knew every member of the staﬀ down to the most junior lamplighter, and every oﬃcial document down to the laundress’s bills.
  Paris at that time was a fascinating spectacle for a man like Aristide Saccard. The Empire had just been proclaimed, after the famous journey in the course of which the Prince-President had succeeded in stirring up the enthusiasm of a few Bonapartist departments. The Chamber and the press were silent. Society, saved once again, congratulated itself and relaxed now that it had a strong government to protect it and relieve it of the trouble of thinking for itself and looking after its own aﬀairs. The main preoccupation of society was to know how to enjoy itself. In Eugène Rougon’s happy phrase, Paris had sat down to dinner and was wondering how to take its pleasure after dessert. Politics terriﬁed it, like a dangerous drug. Men’s enervated minds turned towards dissipation and speculation. Those who had money brought it forth from its hiding-place, and those who had none looked for forgotten treasures in every nook and cranny. And underneath the turmoil there was a subdued quiver, a nascent sound of ﬁve-franc pieces, of women’s rippling laughter, and the still faint clatter of plates and the sound of kisses. In the midst of
  
the great silence, the absolute peace of the new reign of order, there arose every kind of salacious rumour, every kind of golden and voluptuous promise. It was as if one were  passing  by  one  of  those little houses whose closely drawn curtains reveal only women’s shadows, and from which no sound issues but that of gold coins on the marble mantelpieces. The Empire was on the point of turning Paris into the bawdy house of Europe. The gang of fortune-seekers who had succeeded in stealing a throne required a reign of adventures, shady transactions, sold consciences, bought women, and rampant drunkenness. In the city where the blood of December had hardly been washed away, there sprang up, timidly as yet, the mad desire for dissipation that was destined to drag the country down to the level of the most decadent and dishonoured of nations.
  From the beginning Aristide Saccard could sense the rising tide of speculation, which was soon to engulf the whole of Paris. He watched its progress intently. He found himself in the midst of the hot rain of crown-pieces that fell thickly on the city’s roofs. In his endless wanderings through the corridors of the Hôtel de Ville, he had got wind of the vast project for the transformation of Paris, the plan for the demolitions, the new boulevards and neighbourhoods, the huge piece of jobbery in the sale of land and property, which throughout the city was beginning to ignite the conﬂict of interests and the blaze of unrestrained luxury. Now his activity had a purpose. It was during this period that he developed his geniality. He even put on a little weight and stopped hurrying through the streets like a scrawny cat looking for food. At his oﬃce he was more chatty and obliging than ever. His brother, whom he visited in a more or less oﬃcial manner, complimented him on putting his advice so happily into practice. Early in  Saccard conﬁded to him that he had several pieces of business in view, but that he would require a rather large advance.
‘Look for it,’ said Eugène.
  ‘You’re quite right, I’ll look for it,’ he replied good-humouredly, appearing not to notice that his brother had just refused to provide him with the initial capital.
  The thought of this capital now obsessed him. His plan was formed; it matured day by day. But the ﬁrst few thousand francs were not to be found. He became more and more tense; he looked at passers-by in a nervous, searching manner as if he were seeking a
  
lender in every wayfarer. At home Angèle continued to lead her modest and contented existence. He waited for his opportunity; and his genial laughter became more bitter as this opportunity failed to present itself.
  Aristide had a sister in Paris. Sidonie Rougon had married a solicitor’s clerk in Plassans, and together they had set up business in the Rue Saint-Honoré as dealers in fruit from the south of France. When her brother came across her, the husband had vanished and  the business had long since disappeared. She was living in the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonnière, in a little entresol consisting of three rooms. She also leased the shop on the ﬂoor beneath her apartment,  a cramped and mysterious establishment in which she pretended to carry on a business in lace. In the window there were some odds  and ends of point lace and Valenciennes, hung over gilt rods; but  the inside looked like a waiting room, with polished wood panelling and not the least sign of goods for sale. The door and window were hung with light curtains, which protected the shop from the gaze of passers-by and heightened its discreet appearance, as of the atrium  to some unknown temple. It was a rare thing for a customer to be seen calling on Madame Sidonie; usually, in fact, the handle was removed from the door. She made it known in the neighbourhood that she waited personally upon wealthy women with her lace. The convenience of the place, she used to say, was her sole reason for leasing the shop and the entresol, which were connected by a staircase hidden in the wall. In fact the lace-dealer was never at home; she was seen hurrying in and out at least ten times a day. Moreover, she did not conﬁne herself to the lace trade; she used her entresol to store various things picked up nobody knew where. She had waterproofs, galoshes, braces, and so on; and then, one after the other, a new oil for restoring hair, orthopaedic appliances, and a patented automatic coﬀee-pot, the working of which had cost her a great deal of trouble. When her brother called to see her she was selling pianos; her entresol was crammed with these instruments; there were pianos even in her bedroom, a coquettishly furnished room that clashed with the saleroom disorder of the other two. She conducted these two businesses with perfect method: the customers who came for the goods on the entresol entered and left through a carriage-entrance that led into the house from the Rue Papillon; you had to know     the secret of the little staircase to be aware of the twofold nature of
  
the lace-woman’s dealings. On the entresol she called herself Madame Touche, her husband’s name, while on the shop door she had put only her ﬁrst name, which meant that she was generally known as Madame Sidonie.
  Madame Sidonie was thirty-ﬁve; but she dressed with so little care, and had so little of the woman in her manner, that she seemed much older. In fact she appeared ageless. She always wore the same black dress, frayed at the edges, rumpled and discoloured by use, recalling a barrister’s gown worn out by the wear and tear of the bar. In a black bonnet that came down over her forehead and hid her hair, and a pair of thick shoes, she trotted through the streets carrying a little basket whose handles were mended with string. This basket, from which she never parted, was a world in itself. When she lifted the lid there came from it samples of every sort, notebooks, wallets, above all handfuls of stamped bills, the illegible handwriting on which she was peculiarly skilful at deciphering. She combined the attributes of the bailiﬀ and the commission agent. She lived among protests, subpoenas, and court orders; when she had sold ten francs’ worth of pomade or lace, she would insinuate herself into her customer’s good graces and become her business agent, attending solicitors, lawyers, and judges on her behalf. She would thus hawk about the particulars of a case for weeks at the bottom of her basket, going to endless trouble, travelling from one end of Paris to the other with an even little trot, never taking a cab. It would have been difﬁcult to say what she gained from this sort of business; she did it to begin with out of an innate taste for shady dealings and sharp practice; but soon it began to give her a host of little advantages: dinners everywhere, one-franc pieces picked up at random. Her chief gain, however, lay in the conﬁdences she constantly received, putting her on the scent of good business deals and useful windfalls. Living in the homes of others, she was a walking catalogue of people’s wants and needs. She knew where there was a daughter who had to get married at once, a family that stood in need of three thousand francs, an old gentleman willing to lend the three thousand francs but on substantial security and at a very high rate of interest. She knew of matters more delicate than these: the sadness of a fair-haired lady who was misunderstood by her husband; the secret aspirations of a good mother who wanted to see her little girl comfortably married; the tastes of a baron keen on little supper-parties and very young
  
girls. With a faint smile she hawked these wants and needs about; she would walk ten miles to interview people; she sent the baron to the good mother, induced the old gentleman to lend the three thousand francs to the distressed family, found consolation for the fair-haired lady, and a not too enquiring husband for the girl who had to get married. She had big aﬀairs in hand too, aﬀairs she could speak of quite openly and about which she told everybody who came near  her: an endless lawsuit that a noble but impoverished family had employed her to look after, and a debt contracted by England to France in the days of the Stuarts, whose ﬁgures, with the compound interest added, ran up to nearly three thousand million francs. This debt was her hobby-horse: she explained the case in great detail, giving a whole history lesson, and a ﬂush of enthusiasm would rise to her cheeks, usually ﬂaccid and yellow as wax. Occasionally, between a visit to a bailiﬀ and a call on a friend, she would get rid of a coﬀee-pot or waterproof, or sell a bit of lace, or place a piano on the hire system. These things gave her the least trouble. Then she would hurry back to her shop, where a customer had made an appointment to inspect a piece of Chantilly. The customer arrived and glided like a shadow into the discreetly veiled shop; and not infrequently a gentleman would at the same time come in by the carriage entrance in the Rue Papillon to see Madame Touche’s pianos on the entresol.
  If Madame Sidonie failed to make her fortune, it was because    she often worked for the love of it. Adoring litigation, neglecting  her own business for that of others, she allowed herself to be ﬂeeced by the bailiﬀs, though this gave her the pleasure known only to     the litigious. The woman in her faded away; she became a mere business-person, a commission agent bustling about Paris at all hours, carrying in her fabulous basket the most mysterious items, selling everything, dreaming of millions, and appearing in court on behalf of a favourite client in a dispute over ten francs. Short, lean, and sallow, clad in the thin black dress that looked as if it had been cut out of a barrister’s gown, she had shrivelled up, and to see her creeping along the houses one would have taken her for an errand boy dressed up as a girl. Her complexion had the piteous pallor of stamped paper. Her lips smiled an invisible smile, while her eyes seemed to swim in the whirlpool of jobs and preoccupations of every kind with which she stuﬀed her brain. Her ways were timid and discreet, with a vague suggestion of the priest’s confessional and the
  
midwife’s closet, and she had the maternal gentleness of a nun who, having renounced all worldly aﬀections, feels pity for the suﬀerings of the heart. She never spoke of her husband, nor of her childhood, her family, or her personal concerns. There was only one thing she never sold, and that was herself; not that she had any scruples, but because the idea of such a bargain could not possibly occur to her. She was as dry as an invoice, as cold as a protest, and at bottom as brutal and indiﬀerent as a bailiﬀ’s assistant.
  Saccard, fresh from the country, was unable at ﬁrst to fathom the depths of Madame Sidonie’s numerous trades. As he had read law for a year, she spoke to him one day of the three thousand million with an air of seriousness that gave him a poor opinion of her intellect. She came and rummaged in the corners of the lodgings in the Rue Saint-Jacques, summed up Angèle with a glance, and did not return until her errands brought her to the neighbourhood and she felt a desire to discuss the question of the money. Angèle had nibbled at the story of the English debt. The agent mounted her hobby-horse, and made the gold rain down for an hour. It was the crack in this quick intelligence, the sweet mad lullaby of a life wasted in squalid dealings, the magical charm with which she captivated not only herself but the more credulous among her clients. Firm in her conviction, she ended by speaking of the three thousand million as of a personal fortune which the judges were bound sooner or later to restore to her; and this threw a wondrous halo round her poor black bonnet, which bore a few faded violets on brass wire whose metal showed through. Angèle opened her eyes wide. She often spoke with respect of her sister-in-law to her husband, saying that perhaps Madame Sidonie would make them rich one day. Saccard shrugged; he had been to the shop and entresol in the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonnière, and had felt that there was nothing there but imminent bankruptcy. He asked Eugène’s opinion of their sister; but his brother became serious and simply replied that he never saw her, that he knew her to be a very intelligent woman, though somewhat dangerous perhaps. Nevertheless, as Saccard was returning to the Rue Penthièvre some time afterwards, he thought he saw Madame Sidonie’s black dress leave his brother’s and glide rapidly along the houses. He ran after it, but was unable to catch sight again of the black dress. The female agent had one of those slight ﬁgures that get lost in a crowd. He stood pondering, and from this moment he began
  
to study his sister more attentively. It was not long before he grasped the scale of the work performed by this pale, nebulous little creature whose whole face seemed to melt away and become shapeless. He respected her. She was a true Rougon. He recognized the hunger for money, the longing for intrigue, which was the hallmark of the family; only in her case, thanks to the surroundings in which she had matured, thanks to Paris where each morning she had to buy her evening black bread, the common temperament had deviated from  its course, producing this extraordinary hermaphrodism of a woman grown sexless, businessman and procuress in one.
  When Saccard, having drawn up his schemes, set out in search of his initial capital, he naturally thought of his sister. She shook her head, sighed, and talked of her three thousand million. But the clerk would not humour her madness, he pulled her up roughly each time she got back to the Stuart debt; this myth seemed to him to do little credit to so practical an intellect. Madame Sidonie, who quietly accepted the most cutting comment without allowing her convictions to be shaken, explained to him very clearly that he would not raise a sou, as he had no security to oﬀer. This conversation took place in front of the Bourse, where she was about to speculate with her savings. She could always be found at about three o’clock leaning against the rail, on the left, on the post-oﬃce side; it was there that she gave audience to individuals as shady and sinister as herself. As her brother was about to take leave of her, she murmured regretfully, ‘Ah! If only you weren’t married!’ This remark, of which he did not wish to ask the precise meaning, plunged Saccard into deep thought. Months passed. War was declared in the Crimea. Paris, unmoved by a war so distant, devoted its energies more and more to speculation and the commerce of the ﬂesh. Saccard stood by, gnawing his ﬁsts, in frustration at the sight of the growing mania, which he had foreseen. He felt shocks of fury and impatience from the hammers beating the gold on the anvils of this gigantic forge. So tense were his intellect and will that he lived in a dream, like a sleepwalker stepping along the edge of a roof. He was surprised and irritated, therefore, one evening to ﬁnd Angèle ill in bed. His domestic life, regular as clockwork, was upset, and this exasperated him as if it were the deliberate spitefulness of Fate. Poor Angèle complained gently; she had caught a chill. When the doctor came, he seemed very concerned; he told the husband on the landing that his wife had
  
inﬂammation of the lungs and that he could not be sure that she would recover. From that moment the clerk nursed the sick woman without any feeling of anger; he stopped going to his oﬃce, he stayed by her side, watching her with an indescribable look on his face, whenever she lay asleep, ﬂushed and panting with fever. Madame Sidonie found time, notwithstanding her huge volume of work, to call every evening and make special teas, which she claimed would work wonders. To all her other professions she added that of a natural-born sick nurse, taking an interest in suﬀering, in remedies, in the heartfelt conversations that take place round deathbeds. She seemed to have taken a great liking to Angèle; she had a way of loving women, bestowing upon them a thousand caresses, doubtless because of the pleasure they gave to men; she gave them all the attention that merchants bestow on their most precious wares, calling them ‘Pretty one, lovely one,’ cooing to them, and behaving with the transports of a lover in the presence of his mistress. Though Angèle was one of those out of whom there was nothing to be made, she cajoled her like the others, on principle. When the young wife took to her bed, Madame  Sidonie’s  eﬀusions  became  tearful;  she ﬁlled the room with her devotedness. Her brother watched her moving about, tight-lipped, as if crushed with silent grief.
  The illness grew worse. One evening the doctor informed them that the patient would not last the night. Madame Sidonie  had  come early, preoccupied, watching Aristide and Angèle with her watery eyes lit up by momentary ﬂashes of ﬁre. When the doctor  had gone, she lowered the lamp and there was a great hush. Death entered slowly into the hot, moist room, where the uneven breathing of the dying woman sounded like the spasmodic ticking of a clock running down. Madame Sidonie had stopped dispensing her potions, letting the illness take its course. She sat down by the ﬁreplace, next to her brother, who was poking the ﬁre feverishly while throwing involuntary glances towards the bed. Then, as if unnerved by the closeness of the atmosphere, he withdrew to the next room. Little Clotilde, who had been shut in there, was playing with her doll very quietly on a small piece of carpet. His daughter was smiling at him when Madame Sidonie, gliding  up  from behind, drew him into a corner and  murmured  something.  The  door remained open. They could hear the faint rattle in Angèle’s throat.
  
 ‘Your poor wife,’ the agent sobbed. ‘I fear it will soon be over. You
heard what the doctor said?’
Saccard made no answer, but sadly bowed his head.
  ‘She was a good soul,’ his sister continued, speaking as if Angèle was already dead. ‘You may ﬁnd many richer women, and more fashionable women; but you will never ﬁnd a woman so kind.’
  Seeing her pause, wipe her eyes, and wait for an excuse to change the subject, Saccard asked her simply:
‘Have you got something to tell me?’
  ‘Yes, I’ve been working for you in regard to the matter you know about, and I think I’ve found... But at the moment... Believe me,    my heart is broken.’
  She went on wiping her eyes. Saccard let her carry on doing this for a while, without opening his mouth. Then she came to the point. ‘There’s a young girl who needs to get married immediately. The sweet child has had some bad luck. She has an aunt who would be
prepared to make a sacriﬁce...’
  She spoke haltingly, still sobbing, weeping out her words as though still bewailing poor Angèle. Her aim was to make her brother lose patience and question her, so that she would not bear all the responsibility for the oﬀer she had come to make. The clerk was indeed overcome by impatience.
  ‘Come on, out with it!’ he said. ‘Why do they want the girl to get married?’
  ‘She had just left school,’ continued the agent in a mournful tone, ‘when a man seduced her, in the country where she was staying with the family of one of her schoolfriends. Her father has just discovered what happened. He wanted to kill her. Her aunt, to save the dear child, became her accomplice, and they made up a story and told her father that the person responsible was a man of honour whose sole wish was to atone for his momentary lapse.’
  ‘So in that case,’ said Saccard in a tone of surprise and seeming annoyance, ‘the man is going to marry the girl?’
‘No, he can’t, he’s already married.’
  They fell silent. The rattle in Angèle’s throat sounded more painful in the heavy atmosphere. Little Clotilde had stopped playing;   she looked up at Madame Sidonie and her father with her big, pensive eyes, as if she had understood their conversation. Saccard asked a series of brief questions:
  
 ‘How old is the girl?’ ‘Nineteen.’
‘How long has she been pregnant?’
‘Three months. She’s bound to have a miscarriage.’ ‘Is the family rich and respectable?’
  ‘An old bourgeois family. The father used to be a judge. They’re very well-to-do.’
‘What would this sacriﬁce of the aunt’s amount to?’ ‘A hundred thousand francs.’
  They fell silent again. Madame Sidonie had stopped snivelling; she was doing business now, her voice assumed the metallic tones of a second-hand clothes-seller haggling over a bargain. Her brother gave her a sidelong glance and added, with some hesitation:
‘And what do you want out of it?’
  ‘We’ll see later on,’ she replied. ‘You can do something for me in return.’
  She waited a few seconds; and as he remained silent, she asked him straight out:
  ‘Well, have you decided? Those poor women are at their wits’ end. They want to prevent a confrontation. They’ve promised to give the culprit’s name to the father tomorrow. If you accept, I’ll send a messenger with your card.’
  Saccard seemed to wake from a dream; he gave a start, and turned nervously towards the next room, where he thought he had heard a slight noise.
  ‘But I can’t,’ he said in an anguished tone. ‘You know very well I can’t...’
  Madame Sidonie stared at him, with a cold, scornful gaze. His Rougon blood, all his feelings of greed, rushed to his throat. He took a visiting-card from his wallet and gave it to his sister, who put it in an envelope after carefully scratching out the address. Then she went downstairs. It was barely nine o’clock.
  Left alone, Saccard went to the window and pressed his forehead against the icy panes. He forgot himself so far as to beat a tattoo with his ﬁngers on the glass. But the night was so black, the darkness outside hung in such strange masses, that he began to feel uneasy  and returned to the room where Angèle lay dying. He had forgotten her, and received a terrible shock on ﬁnding her half raised up on her pillows; her eyes were wide open, a ﬂush of life seemed to have
  
returned to her cheeks and lips. Little Clotilde, still nursing her doll, was sitting on the edge of the bed; as soon as her father’s back was turned, she had quickly slipped back into the room from which she had been removed and to which all her happy childish curiosity attracted her. Saccard, his head full of his sister’s proposal, saw his dream dashed. A hideous thought must have shone from his eyes. Angèle, terriﬁed, tried to throw herself back in the bed, against the wall; but death was at hand, this awakening in agony was the last ﬂicker of the lamp. The dying woman was unable to move; she sank back, keeping her eyes ﬁxed on her husband, as if to watch his every movement. Saccard, who had dreaded a resurrection, a devil’s device of destiny to keep him in penury, was relieved to see that the wretched woman had not an hour to live. He now felt nothing but deep anxiety. Angèle’s eyes told him that she had overheard his conversation with Madame Sidonie, and that she was afraid he would strangle her if she did not die quickly enough. Her eyes also betrayed the terriﬁed amazement of a sweet and inoﬀensive nature that discovers at the last moment the infamy of this world, and shudders at the thought of the many years spent living with a thief. Slowly her gaze softened; she was no longer afraid, she seemed to ﬁnd an excuse for the wretch, as she thought of the desperate struggle he had so long maintained against Fate. Saccard, followed by the dying woman’s gaze, in which he read such deep reproachfulness, leant against the furniture for support, sought the dark corners of   the room. Then, faltering, he made as if to drive away the nightmare that was tormenting him, and stepped forward into the light of the lamp. But Angèle signed to him not to speak and continued to stare at him with her look of terror-stricken anguish, to which was now added a promise of forgiveness. Then he bent down to take Clotilde in his arms and carry her into the other room. She forbade him this too, with a movement of her lips. She insisted that he should stay there. She expired gently, without taking her eyes oﬀ him, and as her sight dimmed her gaze became more and more gentle. With her last breath she forgave him. She died as she had lived, discreetly, self-eﬀacing in death as in life. Saccard stood trembling before her life-less eyes, still open, which continued to watch him. Little Clotilde nursed her doll on the edge of the sheets, gently, so as not to awaken her mother.
When Madame Sidonie returned, it was all over. With a trick of

the ﬁngers of a woman used to this operation, she closed Angèle’s eyes, to Saccard’s intense relief. Then, after putting the little one to bed, she deftly arranged the bedroom. When she had lit two candles on the chest of drawers, and carefully drawn the sheet up to the corpse’s chin, she cast a satisﬁed glance around her and stretched out in an armchair, where she slept till daybreak. Saccard spent the night in the next room, writing out the announcements of the death. He paused from time to time to jot down ﬁgures on scraps of paper.
  On the evening of the funeral Madame Sidonie carried Saccard  oﬀ to her entresol. There, great decisions were taken. The clerk decided to send little Clotilde to one of his brothers, Pascal Rougon, a doctor who lived alone in Plassans, sunk in research, and who had oﬀered on several occasions to take in his niece to enliven his silent scientiﬁc home. Madame Sidonie gave Aristide to understand that  he must not remain in the Rue Saint-Jacques. She would take an elegant set of furnished rooms for him for a month, somewhere near the Hôtel de Ville; she would try to ﬁnd some rooms in a private house, so that the furniture might seem to belong to him. As to the chattels in the Rue Saint-Jacques, they would be sold, so as to remove the last traces of the past. He could use some of the money to buy himself a wedding outﬁt and some decent clothes. Three days later Clotilde was handed over to an old lady who happened to be going to the south. Aristide Saccard, exultant and rosy-cheeked, fattened already in three days by the ﬁrst smiles of Fortune, rented  in the Marais, Rue Payenne, in a sober and respectable house, a smart ﬁve-roomed apartment through which he moved from room to room in embroidered slippers. They were the rooms of a young priest who had left suddenly for Italy and had sent instructions to  his housekeeper to let them. This woman was a friend of Madame Sidonie, who aﬀected the cloth a little; she loved priests with the love she bestowed on women, instinctively, making perhaps a certain subtle link between cassocks and silk skirts. Saccard was now ready; he had prepared his role exquisitely; he awaited without ﬂinching the diﬃculties and niceties of the situation he had accepted.
  During the terrible night of Angèle’s agony Madame Sidonie had faithfully related, in a few words, the case of the Béraud family. Its head, Monsieur Béraud du Châtel, a tall old man of sixty, was the  last representative of an old bourgeois family whose pedigree went further back than that of certain noble houses. One of his ancestors
  
was a friend of Étienne Marcel. In ’ his father had died on the scaﬀold after welcoming the Republic with all the enthusiasm of a burgher of Paris in whose veins ﬂowed the revolutionary blood of the city. He himself was a Republican of ancient Sparta, whose dream was a reign of universal justice and true liberty. Grown old in the judiciary, where he had developed a professional inﬂexibility and severity, he had resigned his position in , at the time of the coup d’état, after refusing to take part in one of those mixed committees which at that time dishonoured French justice. Since then he had been living alone in retirement in his house on the Île Saint-Louis, on the tip of the island, almost opposite the Hôtel Lambert. His wife had died young. Some secret tragedy, whose wound remained unhealed, added to the gloom of the judge’s countenance. He was already the father of an eight-year-old daughter, Renée, when his wife died while giving birth to a second. The latter, who was called Christine, was taken charge of by a sister of Monsieur Béraud du Châtel, the wife of Aubertot the solicitor. Renée was sent to a convent. Madame Aubertot, who had no children, soon developed a maternal fondness for Christine, whom she brought up as if she were her own daughter. On her husband’s death, she brought the little girl back to her father and took up residence with the silent old man and the smiling, fair-haired child. Renée was forgotten at her school. During the holidays she ﬁlled the house with such a din that her aunt heaved a great sigh of relief when she had at last taken her back to the Sisters of the Visitation, where she had been a boarder since the age of eight. She remained at the convent until she was nineteen, and went straight to spend the summer at the home of her friend Adeline, whose parents owned a beautiful estate in the Nivernais. When she returned in October her Aunt Élisabeth was surprised to ﬁnd her subdued and deeply depressed. One evening she found her sobbing into her pillow, writhing on her bed in a paroxysm of uncontrollable grief. In the throes of her despair the girl told her a heart-rending story: how a man of forty, rich, married – his wife, a young and charming woman, lived there – had raped her while she was in the country, without her daring or knowing how to defend herself. This confession terriﬁed Aunt Élisabeth: she blamed herself, as if she felt that she was responsible; her preference for Christine made her very unhappy; she thought that, had she not allowed Renée to be sent away to convent school, this fate would not have befallen the poor

child. From that moment on, in order to drive away her remorse, which was made even worse by her kind nature, she did everything in her power to support the erring daughter. She bore the brunt of  the anger of her father, to whom they both revealed the horrible  truth through the very excess of their precautions. In her confusion and concern, she invented the strange project of marriage, which she thought would settle the whole aﬀair, appease Renée’s father, and restore her to the world of respectable women; she had no desire to see its shameful side or disastrous consequences.
  Nobody ever knew how Madame Sidonie got wind of this good bit of business. The honour of the Bérauds had been dragged about in her basket with the protested bills of every prostitute in Paris. Once she knew the story, she  almost  forced  her  brother,  whose  wife lay dying, upon them. Aunt Élisabeth began to believe that she owed a great debt to this gentle, humble lady, whose devotion to the unhappy Renée was so great that she had found a husband for her in her own family. The ﬁrst interview between the aunt and Saccard took place on the entresol in the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonnière.  The clerk, who had arrived by the carriage entrance in the Rue Papillon, realized, when he saw Madame Aubertot coming through the shop and the little staircase, the ingenious arrangement of the two entrances. He was a model of tact and good behaviour. He treated the marriage as a business aﬀair, but like a man of the world settling his debts. Aunt Élisabeth was far less at ease than he; she stammered, she did not have the courage to mention the hundred  thousand francs she had promised him.
  It was he who broached the question of money, like a solicitor discussing a client’s case. He felt that a hundred thousand francs  was a ridiculous sum for the husband of Mademoiselle Renée to bring into settlement. He laid some stress on the ‘Mademoiselle’. Monsieur Béraud du Châtel would despise a poor son-in-law even more: he would accuse him of having seduced his daughter for the sake of her fortune; it might even occur to him to make some private enquiries. Startled and dismayed by Saccard’s calm and polite phrases, Madame Aubertot lost her head, and agreed to double the amount when he declared that he would never dare to ask for Renée’s hand with less than two hundred thousand francs in his pocket; he did not want to be taken for a contemptible fortune-hunter. The good lady took her leave quite confused, not knowing what to think
  
of a man capable of so much indignation, and yet willing to accept a bargain of this kind.
  This ﬁrst interview was followed by an oﬃcial visit which Aunt Élisabeth paid Saccard at his rooms in the Rue Payenne. This time she came in the name of Monsieur Béraud. The former judge had refused to see ‘that man’, as he called his daughter’s seducer, as long as he was not married to Renée, to whom he had also forbidden entry to his house. Madame Aubertot had full powers of treaty. She seemed pleased with the clerk’s luxurious abode; she had feared that the brother of Madame Sidonie, with her frayed skirts, might be a boorish person. He received her swathed in a splendid dressing gown. It was at the time when the adventurers of  December, after paying their debts, ﬂung their worn boots and dirty coats into   the sewers, shaved their week-old beards, and became respectable. Saccard was at last to join the gang; he cleaned his nails and washed with the most expensive powders and perfumes. He behaved most courteously; he changed his tactics and aﬀected to be totally disinterested. When the old lady began to talk about the contract, he made a gesture as if to say that it did not matter to him. He had spent the previous week studying the Code, pondering the serious question that would determine his freedom of action as a sharp business practitioner.
  ‘Please,’ he said, ‘let us hear no more of this unpleasant question of money. I think Mademoiselle Renée should remain mistress of her fortune and I master of mine. The solicitor will take care of it.’
  Aunt Élisabeth approved of this way of looking at things; she was afraid that this fellow, whose iron will she could vaguely sense, might wish to make a grab for her niece’s dowry. She now broached the question.
  ‘My brother’s fortune’, she said, ‘consists mainly of houses and property. He isn’t the kind of man to punish his daughter by  reducing her share of the inheritance. He’ll give her an estate in the Sologne valued at three hundred thousand francs, as well as a house in Paris which is worth about two hundred thousand francs.’
  Saccard was most impressed; he had not expected such a large amount; he turned away so as to hide his excitement.
  ‘That will make ﬁve hundred thousand francs,’ continued the aunt, ‘but I’m bound to add that the Sologne property yields only two per cent.’
  
  He smiled and repeated his disinterested gesture, implying that that did not concern him, as he declined to interfere with his wife’s property. He sat in his armchair in an attitude of supreme indiﬀerence, distracted, balancing his slipper on his foot, seeming to listen out of sheer politeness. Madame Aubertot, with her simple-minded good nature, spoke haltingly, choosing her words so as not to cause him any oﬀence. She continued:
  ‘And I want to give Renée something myself. I have no children, my property will one day go to my nieces, and I’m not going to ignore them now because one of them is in trouble. Their wedding presents were ready for them. Renée’s is some large plots of lands in the Charonne area, worth at least two thousand francs. But...’
  At the word ‘land’ Saccard started slightly. In spite of his assumed indiﬀerence he was listening intently. Aunt Élisabeth became confused, apparently at a loss for the right expression, and continued, blushing:
  ‘But I want the ownership of this land to be transferred to Renée’s ﬁrst child. You understand why. I don’t want this child ever to be your responsibility. If the child died, Renée would become the sole owner.’
  He remained impassive, but his intense expression revealed his apprehension. The mention of the land at Charonne had set his thoughts racing. Madame Aubertot was afraid that she had oﬀended him by speaking of Renée’s child, and was unsure how to continue the conversation.
  ‘You haven’t told me in which street the house worth two hundred thousand francs is,’ he said, resuming his smiling, genial air.
  ‘In the Rue de la Pépinière,’ she replied. ‘Near the Rue d’Astorg.’ This simple sentence produced a marked eﬀect on him. He could no longer conceal his delight; he drew up his chair, and with his
Provençal volubility, in coaxing tones, said:
  ‘Dear lady, have we not said enough, need we continue to talk of this confounded money? Please listen, I want to tell you everything about myself because I would be most unhappy if I failed to earn your respect. I lost my wife recently, I have two children on my hands, and I’m a sensible, practical man. By marrying your niece I am doing good all round. If you still have any reservations about me, you will lose them later on when I’ve dried everyone’s tears and made a fortune for the whole family. Success is a golden ﬂame that
  
puriﬁes everything. I want Monsieur Béraud himself to shake my hand and thank me.’
  He was carried away. He talked for a long time in the same bantering tone, whose cynicism from time to time showed through his genial air. He referred to  his  brother  the  deputy,  and  his  father  the receiver of taxes in Plassans. He ended by winning over Aunt Élisabeth who, with involuntary joy, saw the tragedy she had been living through for the past month ending in the hands of this clever man, in something that was almost a comedy. It was agreed that they would see the solicitor the following day.
  As soon as Madame Aubertot had gone, Saccard went to the Hôtel de Ville and spent the day leaﬁng through certain documents he knew about. At the solicitor’s he raised a problem, pointing out that as Renée’s dowry consisted entirely of landed property, he feared it would cause her a great deal of trouble, and he thought it would be wise to sell the house in the Rue de la Pépinière so that she could  invest the capital. Madame Aubertot proposed to refer the matter to Monsieur Béraud du Châtel, who remained cloistered in his apartment. Saccard went out again till the evening. He visited the Rue de la Pépinière and walked about Paris with the preoccupied air of a general on the eve of a decisive battle. Next day Madame Aubertot declared that Monsieur Béraud du Châtel had left the whole matter in her hands. The contract was drawn up along the lines discussed. Saccard would provide two hundred thousand francs, Renée’s dowry was the Sologne property and the house in the Rue de la Pépinière, which she agreed to sell; and in the event of the death of her ﬁrst child, she would be the sole owner of the land at Charonne given to her by her aunt. The contract was in keeping with the system of separate estates by which husband and wife retain full control of their respective fortunes. Aunt Élisabeth listened attentively to the solicitor and seemed content with this system, whose provisions apparently assured her niece’s independence by placing her fortune beyond reach of any attempts to appropriate it. Saccard smiled as he saw the good lady nodding her approval of each clause. It was agreed that the marriage would take place as soon as possible.
  When everything was settled, Saccard paid a ceremonial visit to his brother Eugène to announce his marriage to Mademoiselle Renée Béraud du Châtel. This masterstroke took the deputy by surprise.   As he made no attempt to conceal this, the clerk said:
  
 ‘You told me to look, and I looked until I found.’
  Eugène, bewildered at ﬁrst, began to see what had happened. In  an aﬀable tone he said:
  ‘Well, you’re a clever fellow. I suppose you’ve come to ask me to be your witness. You can rely on me. If necessary, I’ll bring the whole right-wing faction of the Corps Législatif to your wedding; that would give you a good send-oﬀ.’
Then, as he had opened the door, he lowered his voice to add:
  ‘I don’t want to take too many risks just now, we’ve got a very tough bill to pass. The lady’s not very far gone, I hope?’
  Saccard gave him such a ferocious look that Eugène said to himself, as he closed the door:
‘That’s a joke that would cost me dear if I were not a Rougon.’ The wedding took place at the Church of Saint-Louis-en-l’Île.
Saccard and Renée did not meet until the day before. The introduction took place early in the evening, in a small reception room at the Hôtel Béraud. They eyed each other curiously. Renée, since the news of the marriage arrangement, had resumed her mad, reckless style. She was a tall girl of exquisite, tempestuous beauty, who had grown up at the convent, indulging her whims without any parental control. She found Saccard short and ugly, but ugly in a lively and interesting way; moreover, he was perfect in manner and deportment. As for him, he made a little grimace at ﬁrst sight of her; she struck him as being too tall, taller than he was. They exchanged a few words, without embarrassment. If her father had been there he might easily have believed that they had known  each  other  for  a  long  time, and that they shared a guilty past. Aunt Élisabeth, present at their  meeting, was the one who blushed.
  The day after the wedding, which the presence of Eugène Rougon, who had recently made a speech that had attracted a great deal of attention, turned into quite an event on the Île Saint-Louis, the newly married couple were ﬁnally admitted to the presence of Monsieur Béraud du Châtel. Renée cried on ﬁnding her father aged, graver, and sadder. Saccard, whom until then nothing had put out of countenance, was frozen by the chill and gloom of the room, by the sombre austerity of the tall old man whose piercing gaze seemed to penetrate to the depths of his conscience. The former judge kissed his daughter slowly on the forehead, as if to tell her that he forgave her, and turning to his son-in-law, said simply:
  
 ‘Monsieur, we have suﬀered a great deal. I trust you will give us
reason to forget the wrong you have done us.’
  He held out his hand. But Saccard remained unsure of himself.   He thought how, if Monsieur Béraud du Châtel had not been so aﬀected by the tragic sorrow of Renée’s shame, he might with a glance or a gesture have destroyed Madame Sidonie’s plans. The latter, after bringing her brother and Aunt Élisabeth together, had prudently disappeared. She had not even come to the wedding. Saccard decided to be very direct with the old man, having read in his face a look of surprise at ﬁnding his daughter’s seducer ugly, short, and forty years old. The newly married couple were compelled to spend their ﬁrst nights at the Hôtel Béraud. Christine had been sent away two months earlier, so that this child of fourteen would know nothing of the drama that was taking place in the house, which remained as quiet as a convent. When she returned home    she stood in mute horror before her sister’s husband, whom she     too thought old and ugly. Renée alone seemed untroubled by her husband’s age or his sly look. She treated him neither with contempt nor aﬀection, but very calmly, with an occasional glimmer of ironical disdain. Saccard strutted about, made himself at home, and really  succeeded by his directness and energy in gradually winning everybody over. When they left, to install themselves in an imposing apartment in a new house in the Rue de Rivoli, Monsieur Béraud du Châtel had lost his look of surprise and Christine had taken to playing with her brother-in-law as with a schoolfriend. Renée was now four months pregnant; her husband was on the point of sending her to the country, proposing afterwards to lie about the child’s age, when, as Madame Sidonie had foretold, she had a miscarriage. She had laced herself so tightly to hide her condition, which was in any case concealed under the fullness of her skirts, that she had to keep to her bed for several weeks. He was delighted with the way things had turned out. Fortune was at last on his side; he had made a golden bargain: a splendid dowry, a wife whose beauty would be worth a decoration to him within six months, and not the least responsibility. He had received two hundred thousand francs to give his name to a foetus which its mother would not even look at. From that moment his thoughts began to turn aﬀectionately towards the Charonne property. But for the time being he devoted all his attention to a speculative venture which was to be the basis of his fortune.
  
  Notwithstanding the high standing of his wife’s family, he did not immediately resign his post as a surveying-clerk. He talked of work that had to be ﬁnished, of an occupation that had to be sought. In  fact he wished to remain till the end on the battleﬁeld on which he was venturing his ﬁrst stake. He felt at home there, he was able to cheat at his ease.
  His plan for making a fortune was simple and practical. Now that he had at his disposal more money than he had ever hoped for to begin his operations, he intended to put his schemes into action on a large scale. He had the whole of Paris at his ﬁngertips; he knew that the shower of gold beating down upon the walls would fall more heavily every day. Smart people had merely to open their pockets. He had joined the clever ones by reading the future in the oﬃces of the Hôtel de Ville. His duties had taught him what can be stolen in the buying and selling of houses and land. He was well versed in every classical swindle: he knew how you sell for a million what has cost you a hundred thousand francs; how you acquire the right to riﬂe the treasury of the State, which smiles and closes its eyes; how, when throwing a boulevard across the belly of an old neighbourhood, you juggle with six-storeyed houses to the unanimous applause of your dupes. In these still uncertain days, when the disease of speculation was still in its period of incubation, what made him a formidable gambler was that he saw further than his superiors into the stone-and-plaster future reserved for Paris. He had ferreted so much, collected so many clues, that he could have prophesied how the new neighbourhoods would look in . Sometimes, in the street, he would look curiously at certain houses, as if they were acquaintances whose destiny, known to him alone, deeply aﬀected him.
  Two months before Angèle’s death he had taken her one Sunday to the Buttes Montmartre. The poor woman loved dining at a restaurant; she was delighted whenever, after a long walk, he sat her down at a table in some little place on the outskirts of the city. On this particular day they dined at the top of the hill, in a restaurant whose windows looked out over Paris, over the sea of houses with blue roofs, like surging billows that ﬁlled the horizon. Their table was placed at one of the windows. The sight of the roofs of Paris ﬁlled Saccard with joy. At dessert he ordered a bottle of burgundy. He smiled into space, he was unusually pleasant. His eyes constantly returned, lovingly, to the living, seething ocean from which issued
  
the deep voice of the crowd. It was autumn; beneath the pale sky the city lay listless in a soft and tender grey, pierced here and there by dark patches of foliage that resembled the broad leaves of water-lilies ﬂoating on a lake; the sun was setting behind a red cloud and, while the background was ﬁlled with a light haze, a shower of gold dust, of golden dew, fell on the right bank of the river, near the Madeleine and the Tuileries. It was like an enchanted corner in a city of the ‘Arabian Nights’, with emerald trees, sapphire roofs, and ruby weathercocks. At one moment a ray of sunlight gliding from between two clouds was so resplendent that the houses seemed to catch ﬁre and melt like an ingot of gold in a crucible.
  ‘Oh! Look!’ said Saccard, laughing like a child. ‘It’s raining twenty-franc pieces in Paris!’
  Angèle began to laugh too, saying that pieces like that were not easy to pick up. But her husband had risen to his feet, and leaning on the handrail of the window, said:
  ‘That’s the Vendôme Column, isn’t it, glittering over there? And over there, to the right, you can see the Madeleine. A wonderful district, where there’s much to be done. Ah! Now it’s all going to ﬂare up! Can you see? You’d think the whole neighbourhood was bubbling away in a chemist’s retort.’
  His voice became serious and heavy with emotion. The comparison he had hit upon seemed to excite him. He had been drinking burgundy, he was getting carried away; stretching out his arm to show Paris to Angèle, who had joined him at the window, he went on: ‘Yes, yes, that’s what I said, whole neighbourhoods will be melted down, and gold will stick to the ﬁngers of those who heat and stir the mortar. Poor innocent Paris! Look how enormous it is, and how easily it falls asleep! How stupid they are, those great cities! It has no idea that an army of picks will fall upon it one of these ﬁne mornings, and some of the big houses in the Rue d’Anjou wouldn’t shine so brightly in the sunset if they knew that they’ve only got three or
four more years to live.’
  Angèle thought her husband was joking. He had a taste for gross, rather disturbing jokes. She laughed, but with a sense of fear, at the sight of this little man standing erect over the recumbent giant at his feet, and shaking his ﬁst at it while ironically pursing his lips.
  ‘They’ve started already,’ he continued. ‘But it’s nothing much yet. Look over there, near the Halles, they’ve cut Paris into four pieces.’
  
  With his outstretched hand, open and sharp as a sabre, he indicated how the city was being divided into four parts.
  ‘You mean the Rue de Rivoli and the new boulevard they’re building?’ asked his wife.
  ‘Yes, the great transept of Paris, as they call it. They’re clearing away the buildings round the Louvre and the Hôtel de Ville. That’s just child’s play! But it’ll get the public interested. When the ﬁrst network is ﬁnished the fun will begin. The second network will cut through the city in all directions to connect the suburbs with the ﬁrst network. The rest will disappear in clouds of plaster. Look, just follow my hand. From the Boulevard du Temple to the Barrière du Trône, that’s one cut; then on this side another, from the Madeleine to the Plaine Monceau; and a third cut this way, another that way, a cut there, one further on, cuts everywhere, Paris slashed with sabre cuts, its veins opened, providing a living for a hundred thousand navvies and bricklayers, traversed by splendid military roads which will bring the forts into the heart of the old neighbourhoods.’
  Night was falling. His dry, feverish hand kept cutting through the air. Angèle shivered slightly as she watched this living knife, those iron ﬁngers mercilessly slicing up the boundless mass of dark roofs. For a moment the haze of the horizon had been descending slowly from the heights, and she fancied she could hear, beneath the gloom gathering in the hollows, distant cracking sounds, as if her husband’s hand had really made the cuts he spoke of, splitting up Paris from one end to the other, severing beams, crushing masonry, leaving behind it the long, hideous wounds of crumbling walls. The smallness of this hand, pitilessly attacking a gigantic prey, became quite disturbing; and as it eﬀortlessly tore apart the entrails of the great city, it seemed to take on a steely glint in the blue twilight.
  ‘There will be a third network,’ continued Saccard after a pause, as if talking to himself, ‘but that one is too far oﬀ yet, I can’t see it as clearly. I’ve heard only a little about it. It will be sheer madness, an orgy of spending, Paris will be drunk and overwhelmed.’
  He fell silent again, his eyes ﬁxed on the city, over which the shadows were darkening. He must have been trying to imagine the future. Then night fell, the city became indistinct, and it could be heard breathing heavily, like the sea when the eye can only make out the pale crests of the waves. Here and there the white patch of a wall could still be made out; and the yellow ﬂames of the gas jets pierced
  
the darkness one by one, like stars lighting up in the blackness of a stormy sky.
  Angèle shook oﬀ her feeling of uneasiness and took up the joke her husband had made at dessert.
  ‘Well,’ she said with a smile, ‘there has been a ﬁne shower of twenty-franc pieces! The people of Paris are counting them. Look at the piles they’re laying out at our feet!’
  She pointed to the streets that run down opposite the Buttes Montmartre, whose gaslights seemed to be heaping up their specks of gold in two rows.
  ‘And over there,’ she cried, pointing to a bright cluster of stars, ‘that must be the Caisse Générale.’
  This remark made Saccard laugh. They stayed a few moments longer at the window, delighted with this torrent of ‘twenty-franc pieces’, which had ended by setting light to the whole of Paris. On the way home from Montmartre the surveying-clerk no doubt regretted having spoken so freely. He put it down to the burgundy, and begged his wife not to repeat the ‘nonsense’ he had been talking; he did not want, he said, to be irresponsible.
  For a long time Saccard had been studying these three arteries of streets and boulevards, the plans for which he had described quite accurately to Angèle. When Angèle died he was not sorry to think that she took to her grave his overexcited talk during their expedition to Montmartre. There lay his fortune, in the cuts that his hand had made in the heart of Paris, and he had resolved to keep his plans to himself, knowing very well that when the spoils were divided there would be enough crows hovering over the disembowelled city. His ﬁrst plan had been to acquire at a very low price some building which he knew beforehand was condemned to imminent demolition, and to make a big proﬁt by obtaining substantial compensation. He might have gone so far as to attempt this purchase without a sou, buying the house on credit and only receiving the diﬀerence, as at the Bourse, when his second marriage, which gave him a premium of two hundred thousand francs, fuelled his ambition. Now he knew what to do: he would buy the house in the Rue de la Pépinière from his wife through an intermediary, without allowing his own name to appear, and treble his outlay, thanks to the knowledge he had picked up in the corridors of the Hôtel de Ville and to his good relations with certain people of inﬂuence. The reason why he started when
  
Aunt Élisabeth told him where the house was situated was because it lay at the centre of the plans for a boulevard which had not yet been discussed outside the private oﬃce of the Prefect of the Seine. This boulevard would be swallowed up completely by the Boulevard Malesherbes. It was an old scheme of Napoleon I, which they were now thinking of carrying out, ‘in order’, they said earnestly, ‘to give a normal outlet to districts lost behind a labyrinth of narrow streets on the slopes of the hills that mark the outskirts of Paris’. This oﬃcial phrase did not, of course, reveal the Empire’s interest in huge speculative ventures, in organizing the prodigious excavations and building operations that gave the working classes no time to think. Saccard had ventured one day to consult, in the Prefect’s room, the famous plan of Paris on which ‘an august hand’ had traced in red ink the principal boulevards of the second network. The blood-red penstrokes cut even deeper gashes into Paris than did Saccard’s hand. The Boulevard Malesherbes, which was pulling down some magniﬁcent houses in the Rue d’Anjou and the Rue de la Ville-l’Évêque, and necessitated extensive excavations, was to be one of the ﬁrst to be laid out. When Saccard went to look over the property in the Rue de la Pépinière, he thought of his dinner with Angèle on the Buttes Montmartre, during which, at sunset, such a heavy shower of gold coins had fallen on the Madeleine district. He smiled, imagining that the radiant cloud had burst over his own courtyard, and that he was on his way to pick up the twenty-franc pieces.
  While Renée, luxuriously installed in the apartment in the Rue    de Rivoli in the centre of the new Paris, one of whose queens she was destined to become, thought about the new dresses she would buy and took her ﬁrst steps in the life of a woman of fashion, her husband was hatching his ﬁrst great scheme. He began by buying from her the house in the Rue de la Pépinière, thanks to the mediation of a certain Larsonneau, whom he had come across ferreting like himself in the oﬃces of the Hôtel de Ville. Larsonneau, however, had been stupid enough to let himself get caught one day when he was prying into the Prefect’s private drawers. He had just set up as a broker at the end of a dark, damp courtyard at the bottom of the    Rue Saint-Jacques. His pride and greed suﬀered torments there. He found himself in the same position as Saccard before his marriage; he too, he would say, had invented ‘a ﬁve-franc piece machine’; but he lacked the necessary funds to turn his invention to advantage. A
  
hint was enough to enable him to come to an understanding with his former colleague; and he did his part of the work so well that he acquired the house for one hundred and ﬁfty thousand francs. Renée was already, before many months had elapsed, in great need of money. The husband made no appearance except to authorize his wife to sell. When the sale was completed she asked him to invest a hundred thousand francs for her, handing it to him with full conﬁdence, no doubt in order to touch him and make him close his eyes to the fact that she was keeping ﬁfty thousand francs back. He smiled knowingly; he had reckoned on her squandering her money; those ﬁfty thousand francs, which were about to disappear in jewellery and lace, were calculated to bring him a hundred per cent proﬁt. So well satisﬁed was he with his ﬁrst transaction that he carried his honesty so far as really to invest Renée’s hundred thousand francs and hand her the share certiﬁcates. His wife had no power to transfer them; he was sure he would be able to lay his hands on them if ever the need arose.
‘My dear, this is for your dresses,’ he said gallantly.
  Once he had taken possession of the house, he was clever enough to sell it again, twice in one month, to men of straw, increasing the purchase price each time. The last purchaser paid no less than three hundred thousand francs for it. Meanwhile Larsonneau alone  appeared as the representative of the successive landlords, and worked the tenants. He pitilessly refused to renew the leases unless they agreed to a huge increase in rent. The tenants, who had an inkling of the imminent expropriation, were in despair; they ended by agreeing to the increase, especially when Larsonneau added, with a conciliatory air, that this increase would remain a ﬁctitious one for the ﬁrst ﬁve years. As for the tenants who resisted, they were replaced by creatures who received the apartment for nothing and signed anything they were asked to; in their case there was a double proﬁt: the rent was increased and the compensation due to the tenant for his lease went to Saccard. Madame Sidonie helped her brother by setting up a pianoforte agency in one of the shops on the ground ﬂoor. It was then that Saccard and Larsonneau, avid for proﬁt, went  a bit further: they concocted account books, they forged documents so as to establish a trade in pianos on a vast scale. They scribbled away together for several nights. Worked in this fashion, the house trebled in value. Thanks to the last sale, to the increase in the rents,
  
to the ﬁctitious tenants, and  to  Madame  Sidonie’s  business,  it  was able to be valued at ﬁve hundred thousand francs before the Compensation Authority.
  The mechanisms of expropriation, of the powerful system that for ﬁfteen years turned Paris upside-down, creating fortunes and bringing ruin, are of the simplest. As soon as a new boulevard is decided upon, the surveyors draw up the plan in separate sections and establish a valuation of the buildings. As a rule, in the case of houses let as apartments, they add up the total amount of the rents after making enquiries, and are thus able to determine the approximate value.   The Compensation Authority, consisting of members of the City Council, always makes an oﬀer lower than this sum, knowing that the interested parties will claim more and that there will be a concession on both sides. When they are unable to come to terms the case is taken before a jury, which pronounces on the City’s oﬀer and the claim of the evicted landlord or tenant.
  Saccard, who had remained at the Hôtel de Ville for the decisive period, had the impudence at one point to wish to have himself appointed when the works for the Boulevard Malesherbes were begun, and to value his own house. But he was afraid that this would neutralize his inﬂuence with the members of the Compensation Authority. He arranged for one of his colleagues to be chosen, a young man with a sweet smile, called Michelin, whose wife, an extremely pretty woman, occasionally called to apologize to her husband’s employers when he was absent because of ill health. He was often ill. Saccard had noticed that the pretty Madame Michelin, who glided with such modesty through the half-closed doorways, had enormous inﬂuence; Michelin was promoted with each illness, making his career by taking to his bed. During one of his absences, when he sent his wife to the oﬃce almost every morning to say how he was, Saccard bumped into him twice on the outer boulevards, smoking a cigar with the expression of deep contentment that never left him. This ﬁlled him with sympathy for the remarkable young man, for the happy couple, so practical and ingenious. He admired all ‘ﬁve-franc-piece machines’ that were made to work eﬃciently. When he had got Michelin appointed, he called on his charming wife, expressed a wish to introduce her to  Renée,  and  talked  about his brother the deputy, the brilliant orator. Madame Michelin understood.
  
From that day onward her husband was particularly friendly
towards his colleague. The latter, who had no desire to take the worthy young man into his conﬁdence, contented himself with being present, as if by chance, on the day when the other proceeded to value the house in the Rue de la Pépinière. He assisted him. Michelin, who had the emptiest head imaginable, followed the instructions of his wife, who had urged him to please Monsieur Saccard in all things. He suspected nothing; he thought the surveying-clerk was in a hurry to see him ﬁnish his work so as to take him oﬀ to a café. The leases, the rent receipts, Madame Sidonie’s famous books, passed before his eyes without his even having time to check the ﬁgures Saccard read out. Larsonneau was present, and treated his accomplice as a stranger.
  ‘Come on, put down ﬁve thousand francs,’ Saccard ended by saying. ‘The house is worth more... Hurry up. I think there are going to be changes at the Hôtel de Ville, and I want to talk to you about it so that you can let your wife know beforehand.’
  The business was thus concluded. But he still had fears. He dreaded that the sum of ﬁve hundred thousand francs would strike the Compensation Authority as rather excessive for a house that was known to be worth at most two hundred thousand. The explosion in property values had not yet taken place. An inquiry would have exposed him to serious unpleasantness. He remembered his  brother’s words: ‘If you create a scandal, I’ll destroy you’, and he knew Eugène was a man of his word. It was a question of blindfolding the gentlemen of the Authority and ensuring their good will. He glanced at two inﬂuential men, of whom he had made friends through his habit of greeting them in the corridors when he met them. The thirty-six members of the City Council were hand-picked by the Emperor himself, on the recommendation of the Prefect, from among the senators, deputies, lawyers, doctors, and great men of industry who prostrated themselves before the reigning power; but among them all, the fervour of Baron Gouraud and of Monsieur Toutin-Laroche especially attracted the good will of the Tuileries.
  Baron Gouraud’s life story could be summarized as follows: he was made a baron by Napoleon I as a reward for supplying damaged biscuits to the Grande Armée, he was a peer successively under Louis XVIII, Charles X, and Louis-Philippe, and he was a senator under Napoleon III. He worshipped the throne, the four gilded boards covered with velvet; it mattered little to him who sat on it.
  
With his enormous belly, his bovine face, and his elephantine movements, he displayed a charming roguishness; he sold himself majestically and committed the greatest infamies in the name of duty and conscience. But he was even more remarkable in his vices. There were stories about him which could not be told above a whisper. In spite of his seventy-eight years, he continued to lead a life of monstrous debauchery. On two occasions it had been necessary to hush up some ﬁlthy episode, so that his embroidered senator’s coat should not be dragged through the courts.
  Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, tall and thin, had invented a mixture   of tallow and stearine for the manufacture of candles, and longed to enter the Senate. He clung to Baron Gouraud like a leech, rubbing  up against him with the vague idea that it would bring him luck.     At bottom he was exceedingly practical; and had he come across a senator’s seat for sale, he would have haggled ﬁercely over the price. The Empire was to bring into prominence this greedy nonentity, this simpleton with a talent for industrial swindles. He was the ﬁrst to sell his name to a shady company, one of those companies that sprouted like poisonous toadstools on the dunghill of Imperial speculation.  At that time one could see on walls a poster bearing these words in big black letters: Société Générale of the Ports of Morocco, on which the name of Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, with his title as municipal  councillor, was displayed at the head of the list of members of the board of directors, all of whom were totally unknown. This method, which has since been abused, succeeded admirably: the shares were snapped up, though the question of the Ports of Morocco was not    at all clear, and the worthy people who brought their money were quite unable to explain the use to which it would be put. The poster spoke grandiloquently of trading posts to be established along the Mediterranean. For two years several newspapers had been celebrating this project, which they declared to be gaining in prosperity every quarter. In the City Council Monsieur Toutin-Laroche was considered a ﬁrst-rate administrator; he was one of the leading lights of the place, and his tyranny over his colleagues was matched only by his self-eﬀacement in the presence  of  the  Prefect.  He  was  now engaged in the creation of a great ﬁnance company, the Crédit Viticole, a wine-growers’ loan oﬃce, to which he referred with a reticence and an air of solemnity that kindled the covetousness of the idiots around him.
  
Saccard secured the protection of these two gentlemen by doing
them favours whose importance he cleverly pretended to ignore. He introduced his sister to the Baron when the latter was involved in a terrible scandal. He took her to see him under the pretence of seeking his support for the dear woman, who had been petitioning him for a contract to supply the Tuileries with window-curtains. But when the surveyor left them together, it was Madame Sidonie who promised the Baron that she would negotiate with certain people who were clumsy enough not to have felt honoured by the interest that a senator had condescended to take in their child, a girl of ten. Saccard took Monsieur Toutin-Laroche in hand himself; he  arranged to bump into him in the corridor, and raised the topic of  the famous Crédit Viticole. After ﬁve minutes the great administrator, astounded at the extraordinary things he heard, grabbed the clerk by the arm and stood talking with him for a full hour. Saccard whispered in his ear about some highly ingenious ﬁnancial schemes. When Monsieur Toutin-Laroche left him, he squeezed his hand meaningfully and gave him a masonic wink.
‘You must join us,’ he murmured. ‘You really must join us.’
  Saccard excelled himself throughout this business. He was most careful not to make Baron Gouraud and Monsieur Toutin-Laroche each other’s accomplices. He called on them separately, dropped a word in their ear on behalf of one of his friends who was about to be bought out in the Rue de la Pépinière; he was very careful to tell each of the two confederates that he would not mention this business to any other member of the Authority, that it was all very uncertain, but that he was counting on his full support.
  The surveying-clerk was right to take precautions. When the report relating to his house came before the Compensation Authority, it just happened that one of the members lived in the Rue d’Astorg and knew the house. This member objected to the ﬁgure of ﬁve hundred thousand francs, which, according to him, should be  halved. Aristide had had the impudence to have seven hundred thousand francs put down in the claim. But that day Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, who was generally very unpleasant to his colleagues, was in an even more truculent mood than usual. He became angry and sprang to the defence of the landlords.
  ‘We’re all landlords, Messieurs,’ he cried. ‘The Emperor wants to do things on a grand scale, let us not haggle over triﬂes. The house
  
must be worth ﬁve hundred thousand francs; the amount was set down by one of our people, a municipal clerk. Really, anyone would think we were living in a den of thieves; if we behave like this, we’ll end up distrusting each other.’
  Baron Gouraud, sitting low down in his chair, watched Monsieur Toutin-Laroche out of the corner of his eye with an air of surprise, as he ranted and raved on behalf of the landlord of the Rue de la Pépinière. He had a suspicion. But after all, as this violent outburst saved him the trouble of speaking, he began to nod slowly, as a sign of complete approval. The member from the Rue d’Astorg resisted, refusing to give in to the two tyrants of the Authority on a matter in which he was more competent than they were. At that moment Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, noticing the Baron’s gestures of approval, seized the report and said curtly:
  ‘Very well. We’ll resolve your doubts... If you’ll allow me, I’ll look into the matter, and Baron Gouraud will help me with the inquiry.’
  ‘Yes, yes,’ said the Baron gravely, ‘nothing improper must be allowed to interfere with our decisions.’
  The report had already disappeared in Monsieur Toutin-Laroche’s capacious pockets. The Authority had to give in. As they went out on to the Quai, the two confederates looked at each other. They felt as if they were accomplices, and this increased their self-assurance. More vulgar minds would have sought an explanation, but these two continued to argue the case for the landlords as if they could still be heard, and to lament the mood of distrust that was inﬁltrating everything. Just as they were about to part, the Baron said with a smile:
  ‘Ah, I was forgetting: I’m going to the country for a while. It would be very good if you could conduct this little inquiry without me... But please don’t tell anyone, our friends complain that I take too many holidays.’
  ‘Don’t worry,’ replied Monsieur Toutin-Laroche. ‘I’ll go straight to the Rue de la Pépinière.’
  He crept back to his own house, feeling a touch of admiration for the Baron, who had such a skilful way of resolving delicate situations. He kept the report in his pocket, and at the next meeting of the Authority he declared peremptorily, in the Baron’s name and his own, that they should split the diﬀerence between the oﬀer of ﬁve hundred thousand and the claim of seven hundred thousand francs,
  
and allow six hundred thousand. There was not the slightest opposition. The member from the Rue d’Astorg, who had no doubt thought it over, said good-naturedly that he had made a mistake: he had thought they had been talking about the house next door.
  In this way Aristide Saccard won his ﬁrst victory. He quadrupled his outlay and gained two accomplices. One thing alone perturbed him: when he wanted to destroy Madame Sidonie’s famous account books, he was unable to ﬁnd them. He hurried over to see Larsonneau, who brazenly admitted that he had them and that he meant to keep them. Saccard showed no anger; he implied that he had only been concerned for his dear friend, who was far more seriously compromised than himself by the entries, which were almost entirely in his handwriting, but that he was reassured now that he knew they were in his safekeeping. At heart he would gladly have strangled his ‘dear friend’; he remembered a particularly compromising document, a false inventory which he had been fool enough to draw up, and which he knew had been left in one of the ledgers. Larsonneau, handsomely rewarded, set up a broking agency in the Rue de Rivoli, where he had a suite of oﬃces furnished as luxuriously as a courtesan’s apartment. Saccard left the Hôtel de Ville and, being in command of considerable funds to work with, launched furiously into speculation, while Renée ﬁlled Paris with the clatter of her equipages, the sparkle of her diamonds, the vertigo of her riotous existence.
  Sometimes the husband and wife, feverish devotees of money and pleasure, would penetrate the icy mists of the Île Saint-Louis. They felt as if they were entering a city of the dead.
  The Hôtel Béraud, built at the beginning of the sixteenth century, was one of those square, black, solemn ediﬁces, with high, narrow windows, which are so numerous in the Marais, and are let  to proprietors of schools, manufacturers of carbonated water, and bonders of wines and spirits. But it was in an excellent state of repair. On the Rue Saint-Louis-en-l’Île side it had only three  storeys, each ﬁfteen to twenty feet high. The ground ﬂoor was not so lofty, and was pierced with windows protected by enormous iron bars and sunk dismally into the gloomy thickness of the walls; it   had an arched gateway almost as high as it was wide, and bearing a cast-iron knocker on its doors, which were painted dark green and studded with enormous nails that formed stars and lozenges on the two folds. This characteristic entrance was ﬂanked on either side
  
with spur-posts sloping backwards, and strapped with broad iron bands. One could see that formerly a gutter had run under the middle of the gateway, between the weatherings of the pebble-work of the porch; but Monsieur Béraud had decided to stop up this gutter and have the entrance asphalted: this, however, was the only concession he could ever be persuaded to make to modern architecture. The windows of the upper ﬂoors were ornamented with   thin handrails of wrought iron, through which could be seen their colossal casements of strong brown woodwork with little green panes. At the top the roof was interrupted by the dormers, and the gutter alone continued its course so as to discharge the rainwater into the down-pipes. The austere bareness of the façade was heightened by the complete absence of awnings or shutters, for at no season of the year did the sun shine on those pale, melancholy stones. This façade, with its venerable air and its bourgeois severity, slumbered solemnly in the silence of the street that no carriage ever disturbed.
  In the interior of the mansion was a square courtyard, surrounded by colonnades, a miniature version of the Place Royale, paved with enormous ﬂagstones, and completing the cloistral appearance of this lifeless house. Opposite the porch a fountain, a lion’s head half worn away, its gaping jaws alone distinguishable, discharged a heavy, monotonous stream of water through an iron tube into a basin green with moss, its edges polished by wear. This water was cold as ice. Weeds sprouted between the ﬂagstones. In the summer a feeble ray of sunlight entered the courtyard, and this infrequent visit had whitened a corner of the southern façade, while the other  three walls, dull and black, were streaked with moisture. There, in the depths of the courtyard, cold and silent as a well, lighted with a pale, wintry light, one would have thought oneself a thousand miles away from the new Paris, ablaze with every form of passionate enjoyment and resounding with the sound of gold.
  The rooms of the house had the sad calm, the cold solemnity of the courtyard. Approached by a broad iron-railed staircase, on which the footsteps and coughs of visitors echoed as in the aisle of a church, they stretched in long strings of wide, lofty rooms, in which the heavy, old-fashioned furniture of dark wood was lost; and the pale light was peopled only by the ﬁgures on the tapestries, whose great, pale shapes could just be made out. All the luxury of the
  
old-fashioned Parisian bourgeoisie was there, Spartan and ageless. Chairs whose oak seats are barely covered with a little tow, beds with stiﬀ sheets, linen-chests whose roughness would probably damage delicate modern garments. Monsieur Béraud du Châtel had chosen  to live in the darkest part of the mansion, between the street and the courtyard, on the ﬁrst ﬂoor. He had found there a refuge of tranquillity, silence, and gloom. When he opened the doors and walked through the rooms with his slow, solemn step, he might have been taken for one of the members of the old parlements whose portraits were hung on the walls, returning home deep in thought after discussing and refusing to sign an edict of the king.
  Yet in this lifeless house, within these cloisters, there was one sunny spot, full of life, a nook of childhood, fresh air, and bright light. One had to climb endless little stairways, walk along ten or twelve corridors, go down and up again, and then at last one reached a huge room, a sort of belvedere built on the roof, at the back of the house, above the Quai de Béthune. It faced due south. The window opened so wide that the sky itself, with all its sunbeams, all its ether, all its blue, seemed to enter the room. It was perched aloft like a dovecote, and contained long ﬂower-boxes, an immense aviary, and not a single piece of furniture. There was just some matting spread over the ﬂoor. This was ‘the children’s room’. Throughout the house it was known and spoken of by that name. The house was so cold, the courtyard so damp, that Aunt Élisabeth had been afraid that Christine and Renée would suﬀer harm from the chill breath that hung about the walls; she had often scolded the children for running about the colonnades and amusing themselves by dipping their little arms into the icy water of the fountain. After a while she had the idea of using this forgotten attic for them, the only corner into which,   for nearly two centuries, the sun had entered and rejoiced, in the midst of the cobwebs. She gave them some matting, birds, and ﬂowers. The children were ecstatically happy. Renée lived there during the holidays, bathing in the yellow rays of the sun, which seemed pleased with the adornment of his retreat and with the two fair-haired creatures sent to keep him company. The room became a paradise, resounding with birdsong and the children’s babbling. It had been given to them for their exclusive use. They spoke of ‘our room’; it was their home; they went so far as to lock themselves in, so as to put it beyond doubt that they were the sole mistresses of the
  
room. What a happy nook! On the matting lay a battleﬁeld of toys, expiring in the bright sunshine.
  But the great delight of the children’s room was the vast horizon. From the other windows of the house there was nothing to look at but black walls, a few feet away. But from this window one could see all that part of the Seine and of Paris that extends from the Cité to the Pont de Bercy, inﬁnitely ﬂat, like some quaint Dutch city. Down below, on the Quai de Béthune, were tumbledown wooden sheds, piles of beams, and crumbling roofs; the children often amused themselves by watching enormous rats run about among them, with a vague fear of seeing them climb up the high walls. But beyond all this the real rapture began. The boom, with its tiers of timber, its buttresses like those in a Gothic cathedral, and the slender Pont de Constantine, hanging like a strip of lace beneath the pedestrians’ feet, intersected at right angles and seemed to dam up and hold back the huge mass of the river. The trees of the Halle aux Vins opposite and the shrubbery of the Jardin des Plantes, further away, stretched out their greenness to the distant horizon; while on the other bank of the river, the Quai Henri IV and the Quai de la Rapée extended their low and irregular ediﬁces, their row of houses which, from above, resembled the tiny wood-and-cardboard houses which the little girls kept in boxes. In the background on the right the blue-slated roof of the Salpêtrière rose above the trees. Then, in the centre, sloping down to the Seine, the wide-paved banks formed two long grey tracks, streaked here and there by a row of casks, a cart and its team, an empty woodor coal-barge lying high and dry. But the soul of all this, the soul that ﬁlled the whole landscape, was the Seine, the living river; it came from far away, from the vaguely shimmering edge of the horizon, emerging from the distance as from a dream, to ﬂow  straight down to the children with its tranquil majesty, its powerful swell, which spread and widened out into a great sheet of water at their feet, at the tip of the island. The two bridges that crossed it, the Pont de Bercy and the Pont d’Austerlitz, looked like necessary boundaries placed there to contain it, to prevent it from rising up to the room. The little ones loved this giant, they ﬁlled their eyes with its colossal ﬂux, with the eternal murmuring ﬂood which rolled towards them, branched out to left and right, and disappeared into the unknown with the docility of a conquered titan. On ﬁne days, on mornings when the sky was clear and blue, they would be enraptured
  
with the pretty dresses of the Seine; it wore dresses of a changeable hue that altered from blue to green with a thousand tints of inﬁnite tenderness; dresses of silk shot with white ﬂames and trimmed with satin frills; and the barges drawn up on either bank bordered it with a black velvet ribbon. In the distance especially, the material became beautiful and precious as the enchanted gauze of a fairy’s tunic; and beyond the belt of dark green satin with which the shadow of the bridges girdled the Seine, were breastplates of gold and lappets of plaited sun-coloured stuﬀ. The immense sky formed a vault over the water, over the low rows of houses and the green of the two parks.
  Sometimes Renée, a big girl already and full of sensual curiosity brought back from her boarding school, would throw a glance into the swimming school attached to Petit’s ﬂoating baths, which were moored to the end of the island. She would try to catch a glimpse, through the ﬂapping linen clothes hung up on lines to serve as a roof, of the men in bathing-drawers with their naked bellies.
  


CHAPTER III

Maxime remained at school in Plassans until the holidays of 1854. He was a few months over thirteen and had just ﬁnished the second form. It was then that his father decided to let him come to Paris. Saccard felt that a son of that age would give him a certain position, would conﬁrm his role as a wealthy widower, twice married, and serious in his views. When he informed Renée, towards whom he prided himself on his extreme courtesy, of his intention, she answered casually:
‘That’s ﬁne, have the boy sent up. He’ll give us something to do.
It’s so deadly boring in the mornings.’
  The boy arrived a week later. He was already quite tall, but slight, with a girl’s face, a delicate, cheeky look, and very light blond hair. And how oddly he was got up! He was cropped to the ears, his hair was cut so short that the whiteness of his cranium was barely covered with a shadow of pale down, he wore trousers too short for him, hobnailed boots, and a hideously threadbare tunic that was much too wide and made him look almost hunchbacked. In this garb, surprised at his new surroundings, he looked about him, not timidly but with the wild, cunning air of a precocious child unwilling to come out of its shell at ﬁrst sight.
  A servant had just fetched him from the station, and he was waiting in the big drawing room, enraptured by the gilding on the ceiling and furniture, thoroughly delighted with this luxury in which he was about to live, when Renée, returning from her dressmaker, swept in like a gust of wind. She threw oﬀ her hat and the white burnoose she had put over her shoulders to protect her from the cold. She appeared before Maxime, who was stupeﬁed with admiration, in all the splendour of her marvellous attire.
  The child thought she was in fancy dress. She wore a delightful skirt of blue faille, with deep ﬂounces, and over that a sort of guard’s coat in pale grey silk. The ﬂaps of the coat, lined with blue satin of a deeper shade than the faille of the skirt, were boldly caught up and secured with ribbon; the cuﬀs of the ﬂat sleeves and the broad lapels of the bodice stood out wide, trimmed with the same satin. As a crowning touch, as a bold stroke of eccentricity, two rows of large
  
buttons, made to look like sapphires fastened in blue rosettes, adorned the front of the coat. It looked both ugly and entrancing.
When Renée noticed Maxime, she asked the servant, surprised to
ﬁnd him as tall as herself: ‘It’s the boy, isn’t it?’
  The child was devouring her with his eyes. This lady with a skin so white, whose breasts showed through a gap in her plaited shirt-front, this sudden charming apparition, with her hair done up high, with her elegant, gloved hands, and her little Wellington boots with pointed heels that dug into the carpet, delighted him, seemed to him to be the good fairy of this warm, gilded room. He began to smile, and he was just awkward enough to retain his urchin gracefulness.
  ‘Well, he’s quite amusing!’ cried Renée. ‘But what a dreadful haircut! Listen, my little friend, your father will probably not be back until dinnertime, and I’ll have to make you at home. I’m your stepmother, Monsieur. Will you give me a kiss?’
‘Yes, if you like,’ answered Maxime boldly.
  He kissed Renée on both cheeks, taking her by the shoulders, leaving the guard’s coat a little rumpled. She freed herself, laughing, and said:
‘Yes, indeed, how amusing he is, this little bald-head.’ She came back to him, more serious.
  ‘We’ll be friends, won’t we? I want to be a mother to you. I was thinking about it while I was waiting for my dressmaker, and I said to myself that I must be very good and bring you up properly. That will be nice!’
  Maxime continued to stare at her with his cheeky, blue, girl’s eyes, and suddenly asked:
‘How old are you?’
  ‘You should never ask that!’ she cried, clasping her hands together. ‘He has no idea, poor little thing! He’ll have to be taught everything. Fortunately I can still admit my age. I’m twenty-one.’
‘I’ll soon be fourteen. You could be my sister.’
  He did not go on, but his look indicated that he had expected to ﬁnd his father’s second wife much older. He was standing quite close to her, examining her neck so carefully that she almost blushed. Her head, moreover, was turning: she was never able to concentrate for long on the same subject, and she began to walk up and down and talk about her dressmaker, forgetting that she was talking to a child.
  
   ‘I wanted to be here to welcome you. You know, Worms brought me this dress this morning. I tried it on and thought it rather suited me. It’s very smart, isn’t it?’
  She stood before a mirror. Maxime walked around behind her to examine her from every angle.
  ‘But,’ she continued, ‘when I put the coat on, I noticed that there was a large fold on the left shoulder. It doesn’t look right at all, it makes me look as if I had one shoulder higher than the other.’
  He went up to her and pressed his ﬁnger over the fold as if to smooth it down, and his vicious schoolboy hand seemed to linger there with a certain pleasure.
  ‘Well,’ she continued, ‘I couldn’t wait. I had the horses put to, and I went to tell Worms what I thought of his appalling carelessness. He promised to put it right.’
  She remained before the mirror, gazing at herself, lost in a sudden reverie. She ended by placing one ﬁnger on her lips, with an air of contemplative impatience. And in a half-whisper, as if talking to herself, she said:
‘There’s something missing. Yes, there really is something missing.’ Then, with a quick movement, she turned round, stood in front of
Maxime, and asked him:
  ‘Is it really right? Don’t you think it lacks something, a triﬂe, a bow somewhere or other?’
  The schoolboy was reassured by Renée’s familiarity, and regained all his self-conﬁdence. He stepped back, came closer, screwed up his eyes, and murmured:
  ‘No, no, there’s nothing missing, it’s very pretty, very pretty indeed... If anything, I think there’s too much.’
  He blushed slightly, despite his audacity, came closer still, and with his ﬁngertip traced an acute angle on Renée’s breast.
  ‘If I were you,’ he continued, ‘I would hollow out the lace like this, and wear a necklace with a very big cross.’
She clapped her hands, radiant with delight.
‘That’s it, that’s it,’ she exclaimed. ‘I was just going to say that!’
  She folded back the chemisette, left the room for two minutes, and returned with the necklace and cross. Resuming her place in front of the mirror, she murmured triumphantly:
  ‘Oh, perfect, quite perfect... He’s no fool, that little man! Did   you dress the girls in the country? You and I are sure to get on well.
  
But you’ll have to do as I tell you. To begin with, you must let your hair grow and never wear that horrid tunic again. Then you must follow my lessons in good manners. I want you to become a smart young man.’
  ‘Of course,’ said the child naively; ‘since papa is rich now and you are his wife.’
She smiled, and with her customary vivacity said:
  ‘Then let’s begin by saying tu to each other.  I’ve been saying      tu and vous. It’s really silly... Do you think we’ll get on well together?’
  ‘Oh, extremely well,’ he replied, with the eﬀusiveness of a boy talking to his sweetheart.
  Such was the ﬁrst encounter between Maxime and Renée. The child did not go to school until a month later. During the ﬁrst few days his stepmother played with him like a doll; she got rid of his provincial manners, and it must be added that he was very willing to help her. When he appeared, newly arrayed from head to foot by his father’s tailor, she uttered a cry of joy: he looked as pretty as a picture, she said. His hair, however, took an unconscionable time to grow. Renée always used to say that one’s whole face depended on one’s hair. She tended her own religiously. For a long time she had been maddened by its colour, a peculiar pale yellow, which reminded one of good butter. But when yellow hair came into fashion she was delighted, and to make people think that she was not a slave to fashion, she swore she dyed it every month.
  Maxime was already terribly knowing for his thirteen years. His was one of those frail, precocious natures in which the senses assert themselves early. He had vices before he knew the meaning of desire. He had twice narrowly escaped being expelled from school. Had Renée’s eyes been accustomed to provincial graces, she would have noticed that, strangely got up though he was, the little man, as she called him, had a way of smiling, of turning his head, of stretching his arms, that had the feminine air of adolescent schoolgirls. He took great pains to look after his hands, which were long and slender; and though his hair was cropped short by order of the principal, an ex-colonel of engineers, he owned a little looking-glass which he took out of his pocket during classes and placed between the leaves of his book, looking at himself for hours, examining his eyes, his gums, pulling pretty faces, training himself in the art of coquetry. His
  
schoolfriends hung round his blouse as round a petticoat, and he buckled his belt so tightly that he had the slim waist and swaying hips of a woman. In truth, however, he received as many kicks as kisses. The school at Plassans, a den of young  delinquents  like most provincial schools, was a hotbed of pollution that singularly developed his epicene temperament, his childhood marked by evil from some mysterious hereditary cause. Fortunately, age was about to improve him. But the sign of his boyish debauchery, this eﬀeminization of his whole being during the time when he played at being a girl, was destined to remain in him and to strike a lasting blow to his virility.
  Renée called him ‘Mademoiselle’, not knowing that six months earlier she would have spoken the truth. He seemed to her very docile, very aﬀectionate, and indeed his caresses often made her feel ill at ease. He had a way of kissing that warmed her skin. But what delighted her was his roguishness; he was as entertaining as could be, and very bold, already talking of women with a smile, holding his own against Renée’s friends, against dear Adeline who had just married Monsieur d’Espanet, and the fat Suzanne, wedded quite  recently to Haﬀner, the big industrialist. When he was fourteen he fell in love with Suzanne. He conﬁded his passion to his stepmother, who was most amused.
‘I would have preferred Adeline,’ she said. ‘She’s prettier.’ ‘Perhaps so,’ replied the boy. ‘But Suzanne is much plumper. I like
beautiful women. It would be awfully nice of you if you put in a word for me.’
  Renée laughed. Her doll, this tall lad with his girlish ways, seemed to her quite special now that he had fallen in love. The time came when Madame Haﬀner had seriously to defend herself. Meanwhile, the ladies encouraged Maxime with their stiﬂed laughter, their teasing allusions, and the coquettish attitudes they assumed in the presence of this precocious child. There was a touch of aristocratic debauchery in all this. All three of them, in the midst of their tumultuous lives, savoured the boy’s delicious depravity like a new, harmless spice that stimulated their palates. They let him touch their dresses and ﬁnger their shoulders when he followed them into the anteroom to help them on with their wraps; they passed him from hand to hand, laughing almost hysterically when he kissed their wrists on the veined side, on the spot where the skin is so soft; and
  
then they became motherly, instructing him in the art of being a gentleman and pleasing the ladies. He was their plaything, a little toy man of ingenious workmanship, that kissed and ﬂirted and had the sweetest vices in the world, but remained a plaything, a little card-board man that one need not be too afraid of, but just enough to feel a pleasant thrill at the touch of his childish hand.
  After the holidays Maxime went to the Lycée Bonaparte. It was the most fashionable school, the one Saccard was bound to choose for his son. The child, frivolous though he was, had by that time a very quick intelligence; but he applied himself to other things than his classical studies. He was nevertheless a well-behaved pupil, never descending to the Bohemian level of the class dunces, and associating always with the proper, well-dressed young gentlemen who never attracted attention. All that remained of his boyhood was a veritable cult of dress. Paris opened his eyes, turned him into a smart young man, with tight-ﬁtting clothes of the latest fashion. He was the Brummel of his class. He appeared there as if it were a society drawing room, daintily booted, correctly gloved, with amazing neck-ties and indescribable hats. There were about twenty like him in all; they formed a sort of aristocracy, oﬀering one another, as they left school, Havana cigars out of gold-clasped cigar-cases, and having servants in livery to carry their books. Maxime had persuaded his father to buy him a tilbury and a little black horse, which were the envy of his schoolfellows. He drove himself, while a footman sat with folded arms on the back seat, holding on his knees the schoolboy’s knapsack, a real ministerial portfolio in brown grained leather. And how lightly, how cleverly, and with what excellent form Maxime drove in ten minutes from the Rue de Rivoli to the Rue du Havre, drew up before the school door, threw the reins to the footman, and said: ‘Jacques, half-past four, then?’ The neighbouring shopkeepers were delighted with the favours of this fair-haired young spark, whom they saw twice a day arriving and leaving in his trap. On returning home he sometimes gave a lift to a friend, whom he set down at his door. The two children smoked, looked at the women, splashed the passers-by,  as if they were returning from the races.     A remarkable little world, a foolish, foppish brood you can see any day in the Rue du Havre, smartly dressed in their dandy jackets, aping the ways of rich, worldly men, while the Bohemian contingent of the school, the real schoolboys, come shouting and shoving,
  
stomping on the pavement with their heavy shoes, their books hung over their backs by a strap.
  Renée, who took herself seriously as a mother and governess, was delighted with her pupil. She left nothing undone, in fact, to complete his education. She was at that time passing through a period of mortiﬁcation and tears; a lover had jilted her openly, before the eyes of Tout Paris, to attach himself to the Duchesse de Sternich. She dreamt of Maxime as her consolation, she made herself look older, she strained to appear maternal, and became the most eccentric mentor imaginable. Often Maxime’s tilbury would be left at home, and Renée would come to fetch the boy in her barouche. They hid the brown portfolio under the seat and drove to the Bois, then in all the freshness of its novelty. There she put him through a course in high society. She pointed everyone out to him in the fat and happy Paris of the Empire, still under the spell of the magic wand that had changed yesterday’s beggars and swindlers into great lords and millionaires gasping and fainting under the weight of their cash-boxes. But the child questioned her above all about the women, and as she was very familiar with him, she gave him exact particulars: Madame de Guende was stupid but had a very ﬁne ﬁgure; Comtesse Vanska,  a very rich woman, had been a  street-singer  before  marrying  a Pole who beat her, so they said; as for the Marquise d’Espanet and Suzanne Haﬀner, they were inseparable, and though they were Renée’s close friends, she added, compressing her lips as if to prevent herself from saying more, some very nasty stories were told about them; the beautiful Madame de Lauwerens also had a very dubious reputation, but she had such lovely eyes, and after all everybody knew that she herself was quite beyond reproach, though she was a little too mixed up in the intrigues of the poor little women with whom she associated, Madame Daste, Madame Tessière, and Baronne de Meinhold. Maxime obtained the portraits of  these  ladies, and with them ﬁlled an album that lay on the table in the drawing room. With the vicious artfulness that was the dominant note of his character, he tried to embarrass his stepmother by asking for particulars about the courtesans, pretending to take them for society ladies. Renée became serious and moral, and told him that they were dreadful creatures and that he must be careful to keep away from them; and then, forgetting herself, she spoke of them as of people whom she had known intimately. One of the youngster’s
  
great delights was to get her on to the subject of the Duchesse de Sternich. Each time her carriage passed theirs in the Bois, he never failed to mention the Duchesse’s name, with a wicked sideways glance that showed that he knew about Renée’s last adventure. Whereupon, in a harsh voice, she tore her rival to pieces: how quickly she was ageing! Poor woman! She plastered her face with make-up, she had lovers hidden in every cupboard, she had given herself to a chamberlain so that she might gain admission to the Imperial bed. She went on and on, while Maxime, to exasperate her, declared that he thought Madame de Sternich delightful. Such lessons as these singularly developed the boy’s intelligence, the more so as his young teacher repeated them wherever they went, in the Bois, at the theatre, at parties. The pupil became very proﬁcient.
  What Maxime loved was to live among women’s skirts, in the midst of their ﬁnery, in their rice-powder. He still remained more or less a girl, with his delicate hands, his beardless face, his plump white neck. Renée consulted him seriously about her gowns. He knew the best dressmakers in Paris, summed up each of them in a word, talked about the artfulness of such and such’s bonnets and the design of another’s dresses. At seventeen there was not a milliner he had not assessed, nor a bootmaker he had not studied. This quaint little creature, who during his English lessons read the prospectuses  which his perfumer sent him every Friday, could have delivered a brilliant lecture on the fashions of Parisian high society, customers and purveyors included, at an age when country urchins are too    shy to look their housemaids in the face. Often, on his way home from school, he would bring back in his tilbury a bonnet, a box of soap, or a piece of jewellery which his stepmother had ordered the day before. He always had some strip of musk-scented lace in his pockets.
  But his greatest treat was to accompany Renée to the illustrious Worms, the couturier of genius to whom the great ladies of the Second Empire bowed down. The great man’s showroom was huge and square, and furnished with enormous divans. Maxime entered it with religious emotion. Dresses undoubtedly have a perfume of their own; silk, satin, velvet, and lace had mingled their faint aromas with those of hair and of amber-scented shoulders; and the atmosphere in the room had the sweet-smelling warmth, the fragrance of ﬂesh and luxury, that transformed the apartment into a chapel consecrated to
  
some secret divinity. It was often necessary for Renée and Maxime to wait for hours; a queue of at least twenty women sat there, waiting their turn, dipping biscuits into glasses of Madeira, helping themselves from the great table in the middle, which was covered with bottles and plates of cakes. The ladies had made themselves at home, talking freely, and when they ensconced themselves around the room, it was as if a ﬂight of doves had alighted on the sofas of a Parisian drawing room. Maxime, whom they accepted and loved for his girlish air, was the only man admitted into the circle. There he tasted delights divine: he glided along the sofas like an adder; he would be discovered under a skirt, behind a bodice, between two dresses, where he made himself quite small and kept very quiet, inhaling the warm fragrance of his neighbours like a choirboy taking the sacrament.
  ‘That child pokes his nose everywhere,’ said the Baronne de Meinhold, tapping his cheeks.
  He was so slightly built that the ladies did not think him more than fourteen. They amused themselves by making him tipsy with Worms’s Madeira. He said outrageous things to them, which made them laugh till they cried. It was the Marquise d’Espanet who found the right word to describe the situation. One day, when Maxime was discovered behind her back in a corner of the divan, and seeing him blushing, glowing with satisfaction at having been so close to her, she murmured:
‘That boy ought to have been born a girl.’
  Then, when the great Worms ﬁnally received Renée, Maxime followed her into the consulting room. He had ventured to speak on two or three occasions while the master remained lost in contemplation of his client, as the high priests of the Beautiful hold that Leonardo da Vinci did in the presence of La Gioconda. The master had deigned to smile at the accuracy of his observations. He made Renée stand before a mirror which rose from the ﬂoor to the ceiling, and pondered with knit brows while Renée, overcome with emotion, held her breath, so as to remain quite still. After a few minutes the master, as if gripped by inspiration, sketched in broad, jerky strokes the work of art he had just conceived, exclaiming in short phrases:
  ‘A Montespan dress in pale-grey faille..., the skirt describing a rounded basque in front..., large grey satin bows to bring it up on
  
the hips..., and a puﬀed apron of pearl-grey tulle, the puﬀs separated by strips of grey satin.’
  He pondered once again, seeming to plumb the depths of his genius, and, with the triumphant facial contortion of a Pythoness on her tripod, concluded:
  ‘We’ll have in the hair, on this delightful head, Psyche’s dreamy butterﬂy, with iridescent blue wings.’
  But at other times inspiration was slow to come. The illustrious Worms summoned it in vain, and concentrated his faculties to no purpose. He puckered his eyebrows, turned livid, took his head in his hands and shook it in despair, and, beaten, throwing himself into an armchair, would mutter in a pitiful voice: ‘No, no,  not today...  It’s impossible... You ladies expect too much. My inspiration has completely dried up.’ He would show Renée out, repeating: ‘I can’t relate to you this morning.’
  The excellent education Maxime received bore early fruit. At seventeen the young lad seduced his stepmother’s maid. The worst of the aﬀair was that the maid had a baby. They had to send her to the country with the brat, and give her a small annuity. Renée was furious. Saccard did not interfere except to make the ﬁnancial arrangement; but his young wife gave her pupil a good scolding. That he, whom she wanted to turn into a gentleman, should compromise himself with a girl like that! What a ridiculous, disgraceful beginning, what a shameful escapade! He might at least have started oﬀ with a lady!
  ‘Quite true!’ he replied. ‘If your dear friend Suzanne had been willing, she might have been sent to the country.’
  ‘Oh! the little devil!’ she murmured, disarmed, amused by the idea of seeing Suzanne retiring to the country with an annuity of twelve hundred francs.
  Then a funnier thought occurred to her, and forgetting that she  was playing the indignant mother, bursting into pearly laughter which made her put her hand to her mouth, she stammered, giving him a sidelong glance:
  ‘Adeline would have given you a terrible time, and what a scene she would have made with Suzanne...’
  She stopped. They were both laughing hysterically. Thus concluded Renée’s lecture on this episode.
Meanwhile Saccard hardly troubled himself about the two children,

as he called his son and his second wife. He left them in complete freedom, glad to see them such good friends. The apartment was thus ﬁlled with noise and merriment. It was an amazing apartment, this ﬁrst ﬂoor in the Rue de Rivoli. There was a slamming of doors all day long; the servants talked in loud voices; its new and dazzling luxury was continually traversed by a ﬂood of vast, ﬂoating skirts,  by processions of tradespeople, by the noise of Renée’s friends, Maxime’s schoolfellows, and Saccard’s callers. From nine to eleven Saccard received the strangest set imaginable: senators and bailiﬀs’ clerks, duchesses and old-clothes women, all the scum that the streets of Paris hurled at his door every morning, silk gowns, dirty skirts, workmen’s blouses, dress-coats, all of whom he received in the same breathless manner, with the same impatient, nervous gestures; he clinched business arrangements with a brief command, solved twenty problems at once, and gave orders on the run. One would have thought that this restless little man with the very loud voice was ﬁghting with people in his study, and with the furniture, tumbling head over heels, knocking his head against the ceiling to make his ideas ﬂash out, and always falling triumphantly on his feet. At eleven o’clock he would go out; he was not seen again during the day; he breakfasted out, often he even dined out. Then the house belonged  to Renée and Maxime: they took possession of the father’s study; they unpacked the tradesmen’s parcels there, and articles of ﬁnery lay about among the business papers. Sometimes people had to wait for an hour at the study door while the schoolboy and the young married woman discussed a bow of ribbon, seated at either end of Saccard’s writing-table. Renée had the horses put to ten times a day. They rarely had a meal together; two of the three would be rushing about, forgetting themselves, staying out till midnight. An apartment full of noise, business, and pleasure, through which modern life, with the sound of jingling gold and rustling skirts, swept like a whirlwind.
  Aristide Saccard was in his element at last. He had shown himself to be a great speculator, capable of making millions. After the master-stroke in the Rue de la Pépinière, he threw himself boldly into  the struggle which was beginning to ﬁll Paris with shameful disasters and overnight triumphs. He began by gambling on certainties, repeating his ﬁrst success, buying up houses which he knew to be threatened with demolition, and using his friends to obtain huge
  
compensation prices. The moment came when he had ﬁve or six houses, the same houses he had looked at with such interest, as if they were acquaintances of his, in the days when he was only a poor surveying-clerk. But these were merely the ﬁrst steps in his art as a speculator. No great cleverness was needed to run out leases, conspire with tenants, and rob the State and individuals; nor did he  think the game worth the candle. This was why he soon used his genius for transactions of a more complicated nature.
  Saccard ﬁrst invented the trick of making secret purchases of house property on the City’s account. A decision of the Council of State had placed the City in a diﬃcult position. It had acquired by private contract a large number of houses, in the hope of running out the leases and turning the tenants out without compensation. But these purchases were pronounced to be genuine acts of expropriation, and the City had to pay. It was then that Saccard oﬀered to lend his name to the City: he bought houses, ran out the leases, and for a consideration handed over the property at a ﬁxed date. He even began to play a double game: he acted as buyer both for the City and for the Prefect. Whenever the deal was irresistibly tempting,  he stuck to the house himself. The State paid. In return for his assistance he received building concessions for bits of streets, for open spaces, which he disposed of before the new boulevard was even begun. It was a tremendous gamble: the new neighbourhoods were speculated in as one speculates in stocks and shares. Certain ladies were involved, beautiful women, intimately connected with some of the prominent oﬃcials; one of them, whose white teeth are world-famous, has eaten up whole streets on more than one occasion. Saccard was insatiable, he felt his greed grow at the sight of the ﬂood of gold that glided through his ﬁngers. It seemed to him as if a sea of twenty-franc pieces stretched out around him, swelling from a lake to an ocean, ﬁlling the vast horizon with a strange sound of waves, a metallic music that tickled his heart; and he grew bolder, plunging deeper every day, diving and coming up again, now on his back, now on his belly, swimming through this great expanse in fair weather and foul, and relying on his strength and skill to prevent him from ever sinking to the bottom.
  Paris was at that time disappearing in a cloud of plaster-dust. The time predicted by Saccard on the Buttes Montmartre had come. The city was being slashed with sabre-cuts, and he had played a part in
  
every gash. He owned demolished houses in every neighbourhood. In the Rue de Rome he was mixed up in the amazing story of the pit which was dug by a company in order to remove ﬁve or six thousand cubic metres of soil and create a belief that great works were in progress, and which had afterwards to be ﬁlled in when the company went bankrupt, by bringing the soil back from Saint-Ouen. Saccard came out of it with an easy conscience and full pockets, thanks to the benign intervention of his brother Eugène. At Chaillot he assisted in cutting through the heights and throwing them into a hollow  in order to make way for the boulevard that runs from the Arc de Triomphe to the Pont de l’Alma. In Passy it was he who conceived the idea of scattering the rubbish from the Trocadéro over the high ground, so that to this day the good soil is buried two metres below the surface and the weeds refuse to grow through the rubbish. He was to be found in twenty places at once, at every spot where there was some insurmountable obstacle, a heap of rubbish no one knew what to do with, a hollow that could not be ﬁlled up, a great mass of soil and plaster over which the engineers in their haste had lost patience, but in which he rummaged with his nails and invariably ended by ﬁnding some proﬁt or some speculation to his taste. On the same day he would run from the works at the Arc de Triomphe to those at the Boulevard Saint-Michel, from the clearings in the Boulevard Malesherbes to the embankments at Chaillot, dragging after him an army of workmen, lawyers, shareholders, dupes, and swindlers.
  But his greatest triumph was the Crédit Viticole, which he had founded with Toutin-Laroche. The latter was the oﬃcial director; Saccard only ﬁgured as a member of the board. In this connection Eugène had done his brother another good turn. Thanks to him the Government authorized the company and watched indulgently over its career. On one delicate occasion, when a hostile newspaper ventured to criticize one of the company’s operations, the Moniteur went so far as to publish a note forbidding any discussion of so honourable an undertaking, one which the State deigned to protect. The Crédit Viticole was based on an excellent ﬁnancial system: it lent the wine-growers half of the estimated value of their property, ensured the repayment of the loan by a mortgage, and received interest from the borrowers in addition to instalments of the principal. Never was there a mechanism more prudent or more worthy. Eugène had
  
declared to his brother, with a knowing smile, that the Tuileries expected people to be honest. Monsieur Toutin-Laroche interpreted this wish by allowing the wine-growers’ loan oﬃce to work quietly, and founding by its side a banking house which attracted capital and gambled feverishly, launching into every sort of adventure. Thanks to the formidable impulse it received from its director, the Crédit Viticole soon established a solid reputation for security and prosperity. At the outset, in order to oﬀer at the Bourse in one job a mass of shares on which no dividend had yet been paid, and to give them the appearance of having been in circulation for some time, Saccard had the ingenuity to have them trodden on and beaten, a whole night long, by the bank-messengers, armed with birch-brooms. The place was like a branch of the Banque de France. The house occupied by the oﬃces, with its courtyard full of private carriages, its austere iron railings, its broad ﬂight of steps and monumental staircase, its suites of luxurious reception rooms, its army of clerks and liveried lackeys, seemed to be the grave, digniﬁed temple of Mammon; and nothing ﬁlled the public with a more religious emotion than the sanctuary,  the cashier’s oﬃce, which was approached by a corridor of hallowed bareness and contained the safe, the god, crouching, embedded in the wall, squat and somnolent, with its triple lock, its massive ﬂanks, its air of a brute divinity.
  Saccard carried through a big job with the City. The latter was seriously in debt, dragged into this dance of gold which it had led   oﬀ to please the Emperor and to line certain people’s pockets, and was now reduced to borrowing covertly, not caring to confess its violent fever, its stone-and-pickaxe madness. It had begun to issue what were called delegation bonds, really post-dated bills of exchange, so that the contractors might be paid on the day the agreements were signed, and thus enabled to obtain money by discounting the bonds. The Crédit Viticole had graciously accepted this paper at the contractors’ hands. One day when the City was in need of money, Saccard went and tempted it. It received a considerable advance on an issue of delegation bonds, which Monsieur Toutin-Laroche swore he held from contracting companies, and which he dragged through every gutter of speculation. Thenceforward the Crédit Viticole was safe from attack; it held Paris by the throat.    The director now talked only with a smile about the famous Société Générale of the Ports of Morocco; yet it still existed, and the
  
newspapers continued to extol its great commercial stations. One day when Monsieur Toutin-Laroche tried to persuade Saccard to buy shares in this company, the latter laughed in his face and asked him if he thought he was such a fool as to invest in the Société Générale of The Arabian Nights.
  Until then, Saccard had speculated successfully, with safe proﬁts, cheating, selling himself, making money on deals, deriving some sort of proﬁt from each of his operations. Soon, however, this form of speculation was no longer enough for him; he disdained to glean and pick up the gold which men like Toutin-Laroche and Baron Gouraud dropped behind them. He plunged his arms in the sack up to his elbows. He went into partnership with Mignon, Charrier, and Co., those famous contractors, who were then just starting and were destined to make huge fortunes. The City had already decided no longer to carry out the works itself, but to have the boulevards laid out by contract. The tendering companies agreed to deliver a complete boulevard, with its trees planted, its benches and lamp-posts ﬁxed, in return for a speciﬁed indemnity; sometimes they even delivered the boulevard for nothing, ﬁnding themselves amply remunerated by retaining the adjacent building-ground, for which they asked a considerably inﬂated price. The frenzied speculation in land and the fantastic increase in property values date from this time. Saccard obtained through his connections a concession to lay out three lots of boulevards. He was the passionate and somewhat undisciplined member of the partnership. Mignon and Charrier, his creatures at the outset, were a pair of fat, cunning cronies, master-masons who knew the value of money. They laughed up their sleeves at Saccard’s horses and carriages; more often than not they kept on their blouses, always ready to shake hands with their workmen, and returned home covered in plaster. They both came from Langres. They brought into this burning and insatiable Paris their Champenois caution and their calm temperament; they were not very imaginative, nor very intelligent, but were exceedingly quick to take advantage of opportunities to line their pockets, content to enjoy themselves later on. If Saccard was the animating spirit of the business, infusing it with his vigour and greed, Mignon and Charrier, by their matter-of-fact ways, their methodical, narrow management, saved it a score of times from being capsized by the extraordinary imagination of their partner. They would not agree to have superb oﬃces, in a house he
  
wanted to build in order to amaze the whole of Paris. They refused, moreover, to entertain the subsidiary speculative schemes that sprouted in his head each morning: the building of concert halls and immense baths on the building-ground bordering their boulevards;  of railways along the line of the new boulevards; of glass-roofed arcades which would increase the rent of the shops tenfold and allow people to walk about Paris without getting wet. The contractors, to put a stop to these alarming projects, decided that these pieces of ground should be apportioned among the three partners, and that each of them should do as he pleased with his share. They wisely  continued to sell theirs. Saccard built on his. His brain teemed with extravagant ideas. He would have proposed in all  seriousness  to put Paris under an immense bell-glass, so as to transform it into a hothouse for forcing pineapples and sugar-cane.
  Before long, turning over money by the shovelful, he had eight houses on the new boulevards. He had four that were completely ﬁnished: two in the Rue de Marignan, and two on the Boulevard Haussmann; the four others, situated on the Boulevard Malesherbes, remained in progress, and one of them, in fact, a vast enclosure of planks from which a mansion was to arise, had got no further than the ﬂooring of the ﬁrst storey. At this period his aﬀairs became so complicated, he had his ﬁngers in so many pies, that he slept barely three hours a night and read his correspondence in his carriage. The marvellous thing was that his coﬀers seemed inexhaustible. He held shares in every company, built houses with a sort of mania, turned to every trade, and threatened to inundate Paris like a rising tide; and yet he was never seen to realize a genuine clear proﬁt, to pocket a big sum of gold shining in the sun. This ﬂood of gold with no known source, which seemed to ﬂow from his oﬃce in endless waves, astonished the onlookers and made him, at one moment, a prominent public ﬁgure to whom the newspapers ascribed all the witticisms that came out of the Bourse.
  With such a husband Renée could hardly be said to be married at all. She would hardly see him for weeks. For the rest he was perfect; his cash-box was always open. She liked him as she would have liked an obliging banker. When she visited the Hôtel Béraud, she praised him to the skies to her father, whose cold austerity remained quite unaﬀected by his son-in-law’s good fortune. Her contempt had disappeared: this man seemed so convinced that life is a mere business,
  
he was so obviously born to make money with whatever fell into his hands – women, children, pavingstones, sacks of plaster, consciences – that she could no longer reproach him for their marriage-bargain. Since that bargain he regarded her rather like one of the   ﬁne houses he owned and which would, he hoped, yield a large proﬁt. He liked to see her well-dressed, ﬂamboyant, attracting the attention of Tout Paris. It consolidated his position, doubled the probable size of his fortune. He seemed young, handsome, in love, and scatterbrained because of his wife. She was his partner, his unconscious accomplice. A new pair of horses, a two-thousand-crown dress, the indulgence of some lover facilitated and often ensured the success of his most successful transactions. He often pretended to be tired out and sent her to a minister, to some functionary or other, to solicit an authorization or receive a reply. He would say ‘Be good!’ in a tone all his own, at once bantering and coaxing; and when she returned, having succeeded, he would rub his hands, repeating his famous ‘I hope you were good!’ Renée would laugh. He was too busy to desire a Madame Michelin. But he loved crude jokes and risqué stories. For the rest, had Renée not ‘been good’, he would have experienced only the disappointment of having really paid for the minister’s or the functionary’s indulgence. To dupe people, to give them less than their money’s-worth, was his delight. He often said: ‘If I were a woman, I might sell myself, but I’d never deliver the goods: that’s stupid!’
  Renée, who had shot one night into the Parisian ﬁrmament as the eccentric fairy of fashionable, voluptuous pleasure, was the most complex of women. Had she been brought up at home, doubtless  she would, by the aid of religion or some other nervous satisfaction, have blunted the point of that desire whose stinging  sometimes drove her to distraction. Her outlook was bourgeois: she was absolutely honest, loved logical systems, feared heaven and hell, and was full of prejudices; she was the daughter of her father, of that placid, prudent race which nurtures the virtues of the hearth. And in this nature sprouted her prodigious fantasies, her insatiable curiosity, her unspeakable longings. At the Ladies of the Visitation, her mind freely roaming amid the mystic voluptuousness of the chapel and the carnal attachments of her young friends, she had acquired a fantastic education, learning vice and confusing her brain to the extent of singularly embarrassing her confessor by telling him that one day at
  

mass she had felt an irrational desire to get up and kiss him. Then she beat her breast, and turned pale at the thought of the Devil and his cauldrons. The lapse that led to her marriage with Saccard, the brutal rape she underwent with a sort of frightened expectation, made her despise herself, and accounted in large measure for the subsequent abandonment of her whole life. She thought that she need no longer struggle against evil, that it was in her, that logic authorized her to pursue the study of wickedness to its ultimate conclusions. She had even more curiosity than appetite. Thrown into the world of the Second Empire, abandoned to her imagination, kept in money, encouraged in her most extravagant eccentricities, she gave herself, then regretted it, and ﬁnally succeeded in killing oﬀ her good principles, driven by her insatiable desire for knowledge and new sensations.
  Yet she had turned only the ﬁrst page of the book of vice. She was fond of talking in a low voice, and laughing, about the strange cases of the close friendship of Suzanne Haﬀner and Adeline d’Espanet, of the ticklish trade of Madame de Lauwerens, and of Comtesse Vanska’s rationed kisses; but she still looked upon these things from afar, with the idea of tasting similar pleasures perhaps; and the vague longing that arose within her at evil hours increased her anxiety, her mad quest for a unique, exquisite form of pleasure which she alone would enjoy. Her ﬁrst lovers had not spoilt her; three times she had thought herself in the grip of a grand passion; love burst in her head like a cracker whose sparks failed to reach her heart. She went mad for a month, exhibiting herself with her lord and master all over Paris; then one morning, amid the tumult of her passion, she became aware of a great silence, an immense void. The ﬁrst, the young Duc de Rozan, was a feast of sunshine that led to nothing; Renée, who had noticed him because of his gentleness and his excellent manners, found him utterly dull and shallow when they were alone together. Mr Simpson, an attaché at the American Embassy, who came next, all but beat her, and thanks to this remained with her for more than a year. Then she took up with the Comte de Chibray, one of the Emperor’s aides-de-camp, a handsome but extremely vain man of whom she was beginning to tire when the Duchesse de Sternich took it into her head to become enamoured of him and to take him away from her; whereupon she wept for him and gave her friends to understand that her heart was broken, and that she would never fall in love
  
again. So she drifted towards Monsieur de Mussy, the most insigniﬁcant creature in the world, a young man who was making his way in diplomacy by leading cotillons with especial grace; she never knew exactly how she had come to give herself to him, and she kept him a long time, through sheer inertia, disgusted with the unknown that is explored in an hour, and deferring the upheaval of a change until she met with some extraordinary adventure. At twenty-eight she was already world-weary. Her boredom seemed to her all the more unbearable because her bourgeois virtues took advantage of the hours when she was bored to assert themselves and to trouble her. She bolted her door, she had terrible migraines. Then, when she opened the door again, a ﬂood of silk and lace surged through it, a luxurious, joyous being without a care in the world.
  Yet she had had a romance amid the fashionable pursuits of her life. One day, when she had gone out on foot to see her father, who disliked the noise of carriages at his door, she noticed, as she was walking back in the twilight along the Quai Saint-Paul, that she was being followed by a young man. It was warm; and the day was dying in amorous languor. She was never followed except on horseback in the lanes of the Bois, and thought the adventure piquant; she felt ﬂattered by it, as by a new and somewhat crude form of ﬂattery whose very crudity appealed to her. Instead of returning home, she turned into the Rue du Temple and walked her admirer along the boulevards. The man, however, grew bolder and became so persistent that Renée, somewhat put out, lost her head, followed the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonnière, and took refuge in her sister-in-law’s shop. The man came in after her. Madame Sidonie smiled, seemed to understand, and left them alone. When Renée made as if to follow her, the stranger held her back, addressed her respectfully, and won her forgiveness. He was a clerk, his name was Georges, and she never asked him his surname. She came twice to see him; she came in through the shop, and he by the Rue Papillon. This chance love  aﬀair, picked up in the street, was one of her greatest pleasures. She always thought of it with a certain shame, but with a nostalgic smile. Madame Sidonie proﬁted from the aﬀair in that she at last became the accomplice of her brother’s second wife, a part to which she had been aspiring since their wedding.
  Poor Madame Sidonie had experienced a disappointment. While intriguing for the match with Aristide she had expected to marry
  

Renée a little herself, to turn her into one of her customers and make a lot of money out of her. She judged women at a glance, as experts judge horses. So she was astonished when, after allowing the couple a month to settle down, she came upon Madame de Lauwerens enthroned in the middle of the drawing room, and realized that she was already too late. Madame de Lauwerens, a handsome woman of twenty-six, made a business of launching new arrivals. She came of a very old family, and was married to a man high up in the ﬁnancial world who had the bad taste to refuse to pay her couturier’s and milliner’s bills. The lady, a very intelligent person, made money and kept herself. She loathed men, she said, but she supplied all her friends with them; there was always a full array of customers in the apartment she occupied in the Rue de Provence over her husband’s oﬃces. You could always have a snack there and meet your friends in a casual and pleasant fashion. There was no harm in a young girl’s going to see her dear Madame de Lauwerens, and if by chance there were men there who were, moreover, respectful and moved in the best circles – there was no harm in that either. The hostess was adorable in her long lace tea-gowns. Many a visitor would have chosen her in preference to her collection of blondes and brunettes. But by all accounts her conduct was beyond reproach. That was indeed her secret. She kept up her high position in society, had all the men for her friends, kept her pride as a virtuous woman, and derived secret enjoyment from bringing others down and proﬁting from their fall. When Madame Sidonie discovered how the new system worked, she was taken aback. The classical school, the woman in the old black dress carrying love-letters at the bottom of her basket, was brought face to face with the modern, the grande dame who sells her friends in her boudoir while sipping tea. The modern school triumphed. Madame de Lauwerens looked askance at the shabby attire of Madame Sidonie, in whom she scented a rival; and it was she who provided Renée with her ﬁrst lover, the young Duc de Rozan, whom the fair ﬁnancier had found very diﬃcult to dispose of. The classical school did not win the day till later on, when Madame Sidonie lent her entresol  to  her  sister-in-law  so  that she might satisfy her liking for the stranger from the Quai Saint-Paul. She remained her conﬁdante.
  But one of Madame Sidonie’s faithful friends was Maxime. From his ﬁfteenth year he had been in the habit of prowling around at his
  
aunt’s, sniﬃng the gloves he found lying on the sideboards. She, who hated clear situations and never owned up to her little favours, ended by lending him the keys to her apartment at certain times, saying  that she was going to stay in the country till the next day. Maxime talked of some friends he wanted to entertain, and whom he dared not ask to his father’s house. It was in the entresol in the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonnière that he spent several nights with the poor girl who had to be sent to the country. Madame Sidonie borrowed money from her nephew, and went into ecstasies before him, murmuring in her soft voice that he was ‘as soft and pink as a cherub’.
  In the meantime, Maxime had grown. He was now a nice-looking, slender young man who still had the rosy cheeks and blue eyes of childhood. His curly hair had completed the ‘girlish look’ that so enchanted the ladies. He looked like poor Angèle, with her soft expression and blonde pallor. But he was not even the equal of that lazy, shallow woman. In him the Rougons had become reﬁned, had grown delicate and corrupt. Born of a mother who was too young, constituting a strange, jumbled, and so to speak, diﬀuse mixture of his father’s wild appetites and his mother’s passivity and weakness, he was a defective oﬀspring in whom the parental shortcomings were combined and exacerbated. The family lived too fast; it was dying out already in this frail creature, whose sex remained uncertain, and who represented, not greed for money and pleasure like Saccard, but a mean nature devouring ready-made fortunes, a strange hermaphrodite making a timely entrance in a society that was rotting. When Maxime rode in the Bois, pinched in at the waist like a woman, bouncing lightly in the saddle, swayed by the canter of his horse, he was the god of his generation, with his swelling hips, his long, slender hands, his sickly, lascivious air, his correct elegance, and his comic-opera argot. He was twenty, and already there was nothing left to surprise or disgust him. He had certainly dreamt of the most extreme forms of debauchery. Vice with him was not an abyss, as with certain old men, but a natural, external growth. It waved over his fair hair, smiled upon his lips, dressed him in his clothes. But his special characteristic was his eyes, two clear blue apertures, coquettes’ mirrors behind which one could see the emptiness of his brain. These whorish eyes were never lowered: they roamed in search of pleasure, a pleasure that comes without eﬀort, that is summoned, then enjoyed.
  

  The never-ending whirlwind that swept through the apartment in the Rue de Rivoli and made its doors slam backwards and forwards blew stronger as Maxime grew up, as Saccard enlarged the sphere of his operations, and Renée became more feverish in her quest for unknown delights. The three of them ended by leading an astonishingly undisciplined and demented existence. The street invaded the apartment with its rumbling carriages, jostling strangers, and permissive language. The father, the stepmother, and the stepson behaved, talked, and made themselves at home as if they led quite separate lives. Three close friends, three students sharing the same furnished room, could not have used the apartment with less  restraint for the installation of their vices, their loves, and their noisy, adolescent gaiety. They accepted one another with a handshake, never seeming aware of the reasons that united them under one roof, happy to leave each other completely alone. The idea of a family was replaced for them by the notion of a sort of investment company where the proﬁts are shared equally; each took his part of the pleasure, and it was tacitly agreed that each could do with his part whatever he wanted. They went so far as to take their pleasure in each other’s presence, displaying it, describing it, without provoking in the others anything but a little envy and curiosity.
  It was Maxime now who was Renée’s teacher. When he went to the Bois with her, he told her stories about courtesans that amused them both tremendously. A new woman could not appear by the lake without his immediately striving to ascertain the name of her lover, the allowance he gave her, the style in which she lived. He knew these ladies’ homes and all sorts of intimate details about them; he was a living catalogue in which all the courtesans in Paris were listed, with a complete description of each of them. This gazette of scandal was Renée’s delight. On race-days, at Longchamps, when she drove by in her barouche, she listened eagerly while retaining the haughtiness of a woman of the real world, to how Blanche Muller deceived her attaché with a hairdresser; or how the little Baron had found the Count in his underclothes in the alcove of a skinny, red-haired celebrity nicknamed The Crayﬁsh. Each day brought a new piece of gossip. When the story was rather too crude, Maxime lowered his voice, but told it to the end. Renée opened her eyes wide, like a child listening to an account of   a practical joke, restrained her laughter, then stiﬂed it in her embroidered handkerchief, which she pressed daintily to her lips.
  
  Maxime also brought these ladies’ photographs. He had actresses’ photographs in all his pockets, and even in his cigar-case. From time to time he cleared them out and placed these ladies in the album that lay about on the furniture in the drawing room, and already contained the photographs of Renée’s friends. There were men’s photographs there too, Monsieur de Rozan, Simpson, de Chibray, and de Mussy, as well as actors, writers, and deputies, who had come somehow to swell the collection. A strangely mixed society, a symbol of the jumble of people and ideas that moved through Renée’s and Maxime’s lives. Whenever it rained or they felt bored, this album was their great subject of conversation. They always ended up looking at it. Renée opened it with a yawn, for the hundredth time perhaps. Then her curiosity would reawaken, the young man came and leant behind her, and there followed long discussions about The Crayﬁsh’s hair, Madame de Meinhold’s double chin, Madame de Lauwerens’ eyes, and Blanche Muller’s bust; about the Marquise’s nose, which was a little on one side, and little Sylvia’s mouth, which was renowned for the thickness of its lips. They compared the women with each other.
‘If I were a man,’ said Renée, ‘I’d choose Adeline.’
  ‘That’s because you don’t know Sylvia,’ replied Maxime. ‘She’s so funny! I must say I prefer Sylvia.’
  The pages were turned over; sometimes the Duc de Rozan appeared, or Mr Simpson, or the Comte de Chibray, and he added, laughing at her:
  ‘Besides, your taste is perverted, everybody knows that... Can  you imagine anything more stupid than the faces of those men! Rozan and Chibray are both like Gustave, my hairdresser.’
  Renée shrugged, as if to say that she was immune to sarcasm. She was again lost in contemplation of the pale, smiling, or impassive  faces in the album; she lingered longest over the portraits of the courtesans, studying the exact microscopic details of the photographs, the minute wrinkles, the tiny hairs. One day she even sent for a powerful magnifying glass, fancying she had spotted a hair on The Crayﬁsh’s nose. In fact the glass did reveal a thin golden thread, which had strayed from the eyebrows down to the middle of the nose. This hair kept them amused for a long time. For a whole week the ladies who called were made to verify for themselves the presence of this hair. From then on the magnifying glass served to pick the
  

women’s faces to pieces. Renée made astonishing discoveries: she found unknown wrinkles, coarse skin, cavities imperfectly ﬁlled with rice-powder, until Maxime ﬁnally hid the glass, declaring that it was not right to become so disgusted with the human face. The truth was that she scrutinized too closely the thick lips of Sylvia, for whom he had rather a soft spot. They invented a new game. They asked the question: ‘Whom would I like to spend a night with?’ and they looked for an answer in the album. This produced some hilarious couplings. They played this game for several evenings. Renée was in this way married successively to the Archbishop of Paris, Baron Gouraud, Monsieur de Chibray, which caused much laughter, and her own husband, which distressed her greatly. As to Maxime, either by chance or by the mischievous design of Renée, who opened the album, he always fell to the Marquise. But they never laughed as much as when fate coupled two men or two women together.
  The familiarity between Renée and Maxime went so far that she told him of her sorrows. He consoled and advised her. His father did not seem to exist. Then they conﬁded in one another about their childhoods. It was especially during their outings in the Bois that they felt a vague languour, a longing to tell each other things that are diﬃcult to say, that are never told. The delight children take in whispering about forbidden things, the fascination that exists for a young man and a young woman in descending together into sin, if only in words, brought them back constantly to scabrous stories. They revelled shamelessly in the pleasure of this story-telling, reclining lazily in the corners of the carriage like two old schoolfriends recalling their ﬁrst erotic adventures. They ended by boasting about their immorality. Renée confessed that the little girls at the boarding school were very smutty. Maxime went further and boldly related some of the shameful behaviour at the school in Plassans.
  ‘Ah! I can’t tell you,’ murmured Renée. Then she put her mouth to his ear, as if the sound of her voice would have made her blush, and conﬁded to him one of those convent stories that are spun out in dirty songs. He knew too many similar anecdotes to be outdone. He hummed some very bawdy couplets in her ear; and little by little they fell into a peculiar state of beatitude, lulled by all the visions of carnal desire they stirred up. The carriage rolled on, and they returned home deliciously tired, more exhausted than in the morning after a night of lovemaking. They had sinned like two young men
  
who, wandering down country lanes without their mistresses, satisfy themselves with an exchange of reminiscences.
  Even greater familiarity and licence existed between father and son. Saccard had realized that a great ﬁnancier must love women and commit extravagances for them. He was a rough lover, and preferred money; but it became part of his programme to frequent alcoves, to scatter banknotes on certain mantelpieces, and from time to time to use a prominent courtesan as a signboard for his speculations. After Maxime had left school they used to meet in the same women’s apartments and laugh about it. They were even rivals to some extent. Occasionally, when Maxime was dining at the Maison d’Or with some noisy crowd, he heard Saccard’s voice in an adjacent private room.
  ‘I say! Papa is next door!’ he cried, pulling a face like a well-known actor.
  He went and knocked at the door of the private room, curious to see his father’s conquest.
  ‘Ah! It’s you,’ said the latter jovially. ‘Come in. You’re making so much noise that a man can’t hear himself eat. Who are you with?’
  ‘Well, there’s Laure d’Aurigny, and Sylvia, and The Crayﬁsh, and two more, I believe. They’re wonderful: they dig their ﬁngers into their plates and throw handfuls of salad at us.  My coat’s covered    in oil.’
Saccard laughed, thinking this very amusing.
  ‘Ah! Young people, young people,’ he murmured. ‘That’s not like us, is it, my pet? We’ve had a nice quiet dinner, and now we’re going to have a little sleep.’
  He touched the woman under the chin and cooed with his Provençal snuﬄe, producing a strange sort of love music.
  ‘Oh! you old rascal!’ cried the woman. ‘How are you, Maxime? I must be fond of you, to agree to have supper with this father of yours. I never see you these days. Come and see me the day after tomorrow, in the morning, early. I’ve got something to tell you.’
  Saccard ﬁnished an ice cream or a piece of fruit, savouring small mouthfuls. He kissed the woman on the shoulder, saying jokingly:
  ‘You know, my dears, if I’m in the way I’ll go out. You can ring to tell me when I can come in again.’
  Then he carried the lady oﬀ, or sometimes went with her and joined the noisy company in the next room. Maxime and he shared
  

the same shoulders; their hands met round the same waists. They called to one another on the sofas, and repeated to one another out loud the conﬁdences the women had whispered in their ears. They carried their intimacy to the point of plotting together to carry oﬀ from the company the blonde or the brunette whom one of them had chosen.
  They were well known at Mabille. They went there arm in arm, after a good dinner, strolling round the garden, nodding to the women, tossing them a remark as they went by. They laughed out loud, without unlocking their arms, and came to one another’s aid if necessary whenever the conversation became too lively. The father negotiated his son’s love aﬀairs very successfully. At times they sat down and drank with a group of courtesans. Then they moved to a diﬀerent table or resumed their stroll. Until midnight they  were seen, arm in arm, following the petticoats along the yellow pathways, under the bright ﬂames of the gas jets.
  When they returned home they brought with them, in their coats, something of the women they had been with. Their jaunty attitudes, the tags of certain suggestive phrases and vulgar gestures, gave the apartment in the Rue de Rivoli the aura of a disreputable alcove. The carefree way in which the father shook hands with his son was enough to proclaim where they had been. It was in this atmosphere that Renée developed her sensual whims and longings. She mocked them nervously.
  ‘Where on earth have you been?’ she asked. ‘You smell of musk and tobacco. I know I’ll have a headache.’
  The strange aroma in fact disturbed her profoundly. It was the dominant perfume of this singular household.
  In the meantime Maxime became smitten with little Sylvia. He bored his stepmother with this girl for several months. Renée soon knew her from top to bottom, from the crown of her head to the sole of her feet. She had a birthmark on her hip; nothing was sweeter  than her knees; her shoulders had the peculiarity that only the left one was dimpled. Maxime took malicious delight in ﬁlling their drives with accounts of his mistress’s perfection. One evening, returning from the Bois, Renée’s carriage and Sylvia’s, caught in a traﬃc jam, had to draw up side by side in the Champs-Élysées. The two women eyed each other, while Maxime, amused by this confrontation, tittered to himself. When the barouche moved forward again
  
his stepmother maintained a gloomy silence; he thought she was sulking, and expected one of those maternal scenes, one of those strange lectures with which she still occasionally ﬁlled her moments of lassitude.
  ‘Do you know that person’s jeweller?’ she asked him suddenly, just as they reached the Place de la Concorde.
‘Yes, alas!’ he replied with a smile. ‘I owe him ten thousand francs.
Why do you ask?’ ‘No reason.’
Then, after a fresh pause:
  ‘She had a very pretty bracelet, the one on her left wrist. I would have liked to have a closer look.’
  They reached home. She said no more on the matter. But the next day, just as Maxime and his father were going out together, she took the young man aside and spoke to him in an undertone, with an air of embarrassment and a pretty, apologetic smile. He seemed surprised and went oﬀ, laughing his wicked laugh. In the evening he brought Sylvia’s bracelet, which his stepmother had begged him to show her. ‘Here’s what you wanted,’ he said. ‘I’ve become a thief for you,
stepmamma.’
  ‘Did she see you take it?’ asked Renée, who was greedily examining the bracelet.
  ‘I don’t think so. She wore it yesterday, she certainly wouldn’t want to wear it again today.’
  Renée went to the window. She put on the bracelet, held her wrist up a little and turned it round, enraptured, repeating:
  ‘Oh! Very pretty, very pretty. I like everything about it, except the emeralds.’
  At that moment Saccard entered, and as she was still holding up her wrist in the white light of the window, he cried in astonishment: ‘What’s this? Sylvia’s bracelet!’
  ‘Do you know this piece of jewellery?’ she said, more embarrassed than he, not knowing what to do with her arm.
He had recovered, and wagged his ﬁnger at his son, murmuring: ‘That rascal has always got some forbidden fruit in his pocket.
One of these days he’ll bring us the lady’s arm with the bracelet     on it.’
  ‘But it wasn’t me,’ replied Maxime with mock cowardice. ‘Renée wanted to see it.’
  
‘Ah!’ was all Saccard said.



He examined the bracelet in his turn, repeating like his wife: ‘It’s very pretty, very pretty.’
  He took his leave without another word, and Renée scolded Maxime for giving her away like that. But he declared that his father didn’t care a ﬁg! Then she handed back the bracelet, adding:
  ‘You must go to the jeweller and order one exactly like it for me: but it must have sapphires instead of emeralds.’
  Saccard could not be near a thing or a person for long without wanting to sell it or derive some proﬁt from it. His son was not yet twenty when he began to think about how to use him. A good-looking boy, nephew to a minister and son of a prominent ﬁnancier, ought to be a good investment. He was still a triﬂe young, but it   was always possible to ﬁnd a wife and dowry for him and then put the wedding oﬀ, or arrange it quickly, according to the demands     of domestic economy. Saccard was fortunate. He discovered on a board of directors of which he was a member a tall,  handsome man, Monsieur de Mareuil, who was in his pocket within two days. Monsieur de Mareuil was a retired sugar-reﬁner from Le Havre, and his real name was Bonnet. After making a large fortune, he had married a young girl of noble birth, also very rich, who was on the lookout for a fool of imposing appearance. Bonnet obtained permission to assume his wife’s name, which was a ﬁrst satisfaction for his bride; but his marriage had made him madly ambitious, and his dream was to repay Hélène for the noble name she had given him by achieving a high political position. From that time onward he put money into new newspapers, bought large estates in the heart of the Nièvre, and by all the usual means made himself a candidate for the Corps Législatif. So far he had failed, but without losing any of his pomposity. He was the most empty-headed individual one could come across. He was of splendid stature, with the white, pensive face of a great statesman; and as he had a marvellous way of listening, with a profound gaze and a majestically calm expression, he gave the impression of a prodigious inner labour of comprehension and deduction. In reality he was thinking of nothing, but he succeeded in perplexing people, who no longer knew whether they were dealing with a man of distinction or a fool. Monsieur de Mareuil attached himself to Saccard as to a raft. He knew that an oﬃcial candidature was about to fall vacant in the Nièvre, and he fervently hoped that
  
the minister would nominate him: it was his last card. So he handed himself over, bound hand and foot, to the minister’s brother. Saccard, who scented a good piece of business, put into his head a match between his daughter Louise and Maxime. Monsieur de Mareuil became most eﬀusive, imagined he was the ﬁrst to have thought of this marriage, and considered himself very fortunate to enter into a minister’s family and to give Louise to a young man who seemed to have such ﬁne prospects.
  Louise, her father said, would have a million francs for her dowry. Deformed, ugly, and adorable, she was doomed to die young; consumption was slowly undermining her, giving her a nervous gaiety and a delicate grace. Sick little girls grow old quickly, and become women before their time. She was naively sensual, she seemed to have been born when she was ﬁfteen, in full puberty. When her father, that healthy, stupid colossus, looked at her he could not believe that she was his daughter. Her mother during her lifetime had also been a tall, strong woman; but stories were told about her that explained the child’s stuntedness, her manners like a millionaire gypsy’s, her vicious and charming ugliness. It was said that Hélène de Mareuil had died in the midst of the most shameful debauchery. Pleasure had eaten into her like an ulcer, without her husband noticing the lucid madness of his wife, whom he ought to have had locked up in a lunatic asylum. Carried in this diseased body, Louise had issued from it with impoverished blood, deformed limbs, her brain aﬀected and her memory already ﬁlled with a dissolute life. She occasionally fancied she could remember a former existence; she saw before her, in shadowy outline, strange scenes, men and women kissing, a whole drama of carnality that engaged her childish curiosity. It was her mother speaking within her. This vice continued through her childhood. As she grew up, nothing could surprise her; she remembered everything, or rather she knew everything, and she reached out for forbidden things with a sureness of hand that made her,  in life, resemble a man returning home after a long absence,  and having only to stretch out his arm to make himself comfortable and enjoy the pleasures of his home. This odd little girl, whose     evil instincts made Maxime seem almost angelic, had in this second life, which she lived as a virgin with all the knowledge and shame  of a grown woman, an ingenuous boldness, a piquant mixture of childishness and audacity; she was bound in the end to attract
  

Maxime, and to seem to him even more diverting than Sylvia, a respectable stationer’s daughter who had the heart of a moneylender and was terribly bourgeois by nature.
  The marriage was arranged amidst laughter, and it was decided that ‘the youngsters’ should be allowed to grow up. The two families became very close. Monsieur de Mareuil pursued his candidature. Saccard watched his prey. It was understood that Maxime would place his nomination as an auditor to the Council of State among the wedding presents.
  Meanwhile the Saccards’ fortune seemed to be at its height. It blazed in the heart of Paris like a huge bonﬁre. This was the time when the rush for spoils ﬁlled a corner of the forest with the yelping of hounds, the cracking of whips, the ﬂaring of torches. The appetites let loose were satisﬁed at last, shamelessly, amid the sound of crumbling neighbourhoods and fortunes made in six months. The city had become an orgy of gold and women. Vice, coming from on high, ﬂowed through the gutters, spread out over the ornamental waters, shot up in the fountains of the public gardens, and fell on the roofs as ﬁne rain. At night, when people crossed the bridges, it seemed as if the Seine drew along with it, through the sleeping city, all the refuse of the streets, crumbs fallen from tables, bows of lace left on couches, false hair forgotten in cabs, banknotes that had slipped out of bodices, everything thrown out of the window by the brutality of desire and the immediate satisfaction of appetites. Then, amid the troubled sleep of Paris, and even more clearly than during its feverish quest in broad daylight, one felt a growing sense of madness, the voluptuous nightmare of a city obsessed with gold and ﬂesh. The violins played until midnight; then the windows became dark and shadows descended over the city. It was like a giant alcove in which the last candle had been blown out, the last remnant of shame extinguished. There was nothing left in the darkness except a great rattle of furious and wearied lovemaking; while the Tuileries, by the riverside, stretched out its arms, as if for a huge embrace.
  Saccard had just built his mansion in the Parc Monceau, on a plot of ground stolen from the City. He had reserved for himself, on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, a magniﬁcent study, in ebony and gold, with tall glass doors to the bookcases, full of ﬁles, but without a book to be seen; the safe, built into the wall, yawned like an iron alcove, large enough to accommodate the love aﬀairs that a hundred thousand francs could
  
buy. Here his fortune bloomed and insolently displayed itself. Everything he touched seemed to succeed. When he left the Rue de Rivoli, enlarging his household and doubling his expenses, he talked to his friends of considerable gains. According to him, his partnership with Mignon and Charrier brought him enormous proﬁts; his speculations in real estate came oﬀ even better; while the Crédit Viticole was an inexhaustible milch-cow. He had a way of enumerating his riches that bewildered his listeners and prevented them from seeing the truth. His Provençal accent grew more pronounced: with his short phrases and nervous gestures he let oﬀ ﬁreworks in which millions shot up like rockets and ended by dazzling the most incredulous. These frenetic performances were mainly responsible for his reputation as a lucky speculator. In truth, no one knew whether he had   any solid capital assets. His various partners, who were necessarily acquainted with his position as regards themselves, explained his colossal fortune by believing in his absolute luck in other speculations, those in which they had no share. He spent money madly; the ﬂow from his cash-box continued, though the sources of that stream of gold had not yet been discovered. It was pure folly, a frenzy of money, handfuls of louis ﬂung out of the windows, the safe emptied every evening to its last sou, ﬁlling up again during the night, no one knew how, and never supplying such large sums as when Saccard pretended to have lost the keys.
  In this fortune, which roared and overﬂowed like a winter torrent, Renée’s dowry was tossed about, carried oﬀ, and drowned. The young wife, who had been mistrustful in the early days of the marriage and wanted to manage her property herself, soon grew weary of business; she felt poor beside her husband and, crushed by debt, she was obliged to ask him for help, to borrow money from him and place herself in his hands. With each fresh bill that he paid, with the smile of a man indulgent towards human foibles, she surrendered a little more, conﬁding dividend-warrants to him, authorizing him to sell this or that. When they moved into the house in the Parc Monceau, she already found herself stripped almost bare. He had taken the place of the State, and paid her the interest on the hundred thousand francs coming from the Rue de la Pépinière; on the other hand, he had made her sell the Sologne property in order to sink the proceeds in a great business project. She therefore had nothing left except the Charonne building-plots, which she obstinately refused to part with
  

so as not to sadden her Aunt Élisabeth. But Saccard was preparing a stroke of genius, with the help of his old accomplice, Larsonneau. Renée remained his debtor; though he had taken her fortune, he paid her the income ﬁve or six times over. The interest on the hundred thousand francs, added to the revenue from the Sologne money, amounted to barely nine or ten thousand francs, just enough to pay her hosier and bootmaker. He gave her, or spent on her, ﬁfteen or twenty times that sum. He would have worked for a week to rob her of a hundred francs, and he kept her like a queen. So, like everyone else, she respected her husband’s monumental safe, without trying to penetrate the mystery of the stream of gold ﬂowing under her eyes, and into which she threw herself every morning.
  At the mansion in the Parc Monceau, life became sheer delirium, a dazzling triumph. The Saccards doubled the number of their carriages and horses; they had an army of servants whom they dressed in a dark-blue livery with drab breeches and black-and-yellow striped waistcoats, a rather severe colour scheme the ﬁnancier had chosen in order to appear respectable, one of his most cherished dreams. They emblazoned their luxury on the walls, and drew back the curtains when they gave big dinner-parties. The whirlwind of contemporary life, which had made the doors on the ﬁrst ﬂoor in the Rue de Rivoli constantly slam, had become an absolute hurricane which threatened to blow away the partitions. In the midst of these princely rooms, along the gilded balustrades, over the ﬁne velvet carpets, in this fairy parvenu palace, there trailed the aroma of Mabille, there danced jaunty popular quadrilles, the whole period  passed by with its mad, stupid laughter, its eternal hunger, and its eternal thirst. It was a disorderly house of pleasure, the brash pleasure that enlarges the windows so that the passers-by can share the secrets of the alcoves. The husband and wife lived there freely, under their servants’ eyes. They divided the house into two, camping there, as if they had been dropped, at the end of a tumultuous journey, into some palatial hotel where they had simply unpacked their trunks before rushing out to taste the delights of a new city. They slept  there at night, staying at home only on the days of their great dinner-parties, carried away by constant trips across Paris, returning sometimes for an hour as one returns to a room at an inn between  excursions. Renée felt restless and nervous there; her silk skirts glided with snakelike hisses over the thick carpets, along the satin of
  
the couches; she was irritated by the idiotic gilding that surrounded her, by the high, empty ceilings, where after nights of festivity there lingered nothing but the laughter of young fools and the sententious maxims of old rogues; and to ﬁll this luxury, to live amid this splendour, she longed for a supreme form of pleasure, which she sought vainly in all corners of the house, in the little sun-coloured drawing room, and in the hothouse with its lush vegetation. As for Saccard, he was realizing his dream: he received representatives of high ﬁnance: Monsieur Toutin-Laroche and Monsieur de Lauwerens; he received great politicians, Baron Gouraud and Haﬀner the deputy; his brother the minister had even agreed to come two or three times and consolidate Saccard’s position by his presence. Yet, like his wife, he felt restless and nervous. He became so giddy, so bewildered, that his acquaintances said: ‘That Saccard! He makes too much money, it’ll drive him mad!’ In  he had been decorated, in recognition of a mysterious favour he had done the Prefect, by lending his name to a lady for the sale of some land.
  It was at about the time of their installation in the Parc Monceau that an apparition crossed Renée’s life, leaving an indelible impression. Up until then the minister had resisted the entreaties of his sister-in-law, who was dying to be invited to the court balls. He gave in at last, thinking his brother’s fortune had been made. Renée did not sleep for a month. The great evening came, and she sat trembling in the carriage that drove her to the Tuileries.
  She wore a costume of extraordinary grace and originality, an inspired creation she had hit upon one sleepless night, and which three of Worms’s assistants had come to her house to work on under her supervision. It was a simple dress of white gauze, but trimmed with a multitude of little ﬂounces, scalloped out and edged with black velvet. The black velvet tunic was cut out square, very low over her bosom, which was framed with narrow lace, barely a ﬁnger deep. No ﬂower, no; at her wrists, bracelets without any chasing, and on her head a simple gold diadem, which gave her a kind of halo.
  When she reached the reception rooms, and her husband had left her to speak to Baron Gouraud, she had a sudden feeling of embarrassment. But the mirrors, in which she saw that she was adorable, reassured her, and she was becoming used to the hot air and the murmur of voices, to the crowd of dress-coats and white shoulders, when the Emperor appeared. He slowly crossed the room on the arm
  

of a short, fat General, who was panting as if he suﬀered from indigestion. The shoulders drew up in two lines, while the dress-coats stepped back discreetly. Renée found herself pushed to the end of the line of shoulders, near the second door, the one which the Emperor was approaching with a faltering step. She saw him come towards her, from one door to the other.
  He was in plain dress, with the red ribbon of the Legion of Honour. Renée, again overcome with emotion, could scarcely make out what she saw, and to her this bleeding stain seemed to splash the whole of the sovereign’s breast. She found him quite small, with short legs and swaying hips; but she was utterly charmed, and he seemed handsome, with his wan face and the heavy, leaden lids that fell over his lifeless eyes. Under his moustache his mouth opened feebly; while only his nose stood out from the dissolution of his face. Looking weary, vaguely smiling, the Emperor and the old General advanced with short steps, seeming to hold each other up. They looked at the bowing ladies, and their glances, cast to right and left, glided into the bodices. The General leant on one side, said something to his master, and squeezed his arm with the air of an old friend. The Emperor, lethargic and inscrutable, even more lifeless
than usual, came closer and closer with his shuﬄing step.
  They were in the middle of the room when Renée felt their eyes ﬁxed upon her. The General examined her with a look of surprise, while the Emperor, half-raising his eyelids, showed a tawny glow  in the hesitant greyness of his bleary eyes. Renée, becoming embarrassed, lowered her head, bowed, and stared at the carpet. But she followed their shadows, and realized that they were pausing for a few seconds before her. She thought she heard the Emperor, that enigmatic dreamer, murmur as he gazed at her, absorbed in her muslin skirt striped with velvet:
  ‘Look, General, there’s a ﬂower worth picking, a special black and white carnation.’
The General replied, in a coarser voice:
‘Sir, that carnation would look most ﬁne in our buttonholes.’
  Renée looked up. The vision had disappeared, the crowd was thronging round the doorway. After that evening she frequently returned to the Tuileries; she even had the honour of being complimented by His Majesty and of becoming a vague friend; but she always remembered the sovereign’s slow, heavy walk across the room
  
between the two rows of shoulders; and whenever she experienced any new joy amid her husband’s growing prosperity, she remembered the Emperor gazing down at the bowing bosoms, coming towards her, comparing her to a carnation which the old General advised him to put in his buttonhole. It was the greatest thrill of    her life.



CHAPTER IV

The exquisite longing Renée had felt amid the disturbing perfumes of the hothouse, while Maxime and Louise sat laughing on a sofa in the little buttercup drawing room, seemed to vanish like a nightmare that leaves behind it nothing but a vague shudder. Throughout the night she had the bitterness of the tanghin tree on her lips; it seemed to her, when she felt the burning taste of the poisonous leaf, as if a red-hot mouth were being pressed to hers, breathing into her an all-consuming passion. Then this mouth disappeared, and her dream was drowned in the vast waves of shadow that rolled over her. In the morning she slept a little. When she awoke, she fancied she was ill. She had the curtains drawn, spoke to her doctor of sickness and headache, and for two days refused to go out. Pretending that she was under siege, she received no one. Maxime knocked in vain. He did not sleep in the house, preferring to be free to do as he pleased in his rooms; and in fact he led the most nomadic life in the world, living in his father’s new houses, choosing the ﬂoor he liked best, moving every month, often on a whim, sometimes to make room for tenants. He would keep company with some mistress while the paint was still wet. Accustomed to his stepmother’s moods, he feigned great sympathy and, four times a day, went upstairs to ask after her with a most concerned expression, just to tease her. On the third day he found her in the little drawing room, pink and smiling,
looking relaxed and rested.
  ‘Well! Have you had a good time with Céleste?’ he asked, alluding to her long tête-à-tête with her maid.
  ‘Yes,’ she replied, ‘she’s priceless. Her hands are always like ice; she put them on my forehead and soothed my poor head a little.’
  ‘That girl can cure everything!’ cried Maxime. If ever I have the misfortune to fall in love, you’ll lend her to me, won’t you? To put her hands on my heart.’
  They continued their banter, and went for their usual drive in the Bois. Two weeks passed. Renée had thrown herself more madly into her life of visits and balls; her head seemed to have turned once more, she complained no longer of lassitude and disgust. One might have suspected that she had committed some sin which she kept to
  
herself, but which she betrayed by a more marked contempt for herself and by a more reckless depravity. One evening she confessed to Maxime that she was dying to go to a ball which Blanche Muller, a popular actress, was giving to the princesses of the footlights and the queens of the demi-monde. This confession surprised and embarrassed even Maxime, who, after all, had few scruples. He tried to lecture his stepmother: really, that was no place for her; besides, she would see nothing very entertaining there; and if she were recognized, what a scandal there would be. To these arguments she answered with clasped hands, smiling and entreating:
  ‘Oh please, Maxime, I want to go. I’ll wear a very dark domino, and we’ll just walk through the rooms.’
  Maxime always gave in, and would have taken his stepmother to every brothel in Paris if she asked. When he agreed to escort her to Blanche Muller’s ball, she clapped her hands like a child given an unexpected holiday.
  ‘You’re such a darling,’ she said. ‘It’s tomorrow, isn’t it? Come and fetch me very early. I want to see the women arrive. You must tell me their names; we’ll have a marvellous time.’
She reﬂected, and then added:
  ‘No, don’t come here. Wait for me in a cab on the Boulevard Malesherbes. I’ll leave through the garden.’
  This mysteriousness gave added spice to her escapade: a simple reﬁnement of pleasure, for she could have left at midnight by the front door without her husband’s so much as putting his head out of the window.
  The next day, after telling Céleste to sit up for her, she ran shivering through the dark shadows of the Parc Monceau. Saccard had taken advantage of his good understanding with the Hôtel de Ville to acquire a key to a little gate in the gardens, and Renée had asked for one as well. She almost lost her way, and only found the cab thanks to the two yellow eyes of the lamps. At this period the Boulevard Malesherbes, barely ﬁnished, was still totally deserted at night-time. Renée glided into the vehicle in a state of great excitement, her heart beating rapturously, as if she were on her way to an assignation. Maxime smoked philosophically, half asleep in a corner of the cab. He wanted to throw away his cigar, but she stopped him, and in trying to hold his arm back in the darkness she put her hand full in his face, which amused them both greatly.
  

  ‘I told you I like the smell of tobacco,’ she cried. ‘Go on smoking... Besides, we can do anything we like this evening. I’m a man, you see.’
  The gas lamps had not yet been lit along the boulevard. While the cab drove down to the Madeleine it was so dark inside that they could not see one another. Now and again, when the young man raised his cigar to his lips, a red spot pierced the darkness. This red spot interested Renée. Maxime, who was half covered by the black satin domino that ﬁlled the inside of the cab, continued smoking in silence, with a weary expression. The truth was that his stepmother’s whim had prevented him from following a party of women who had decided to begin and end Blanche Muller’s ball at the Café Anglais. He was quite sullen, and she could sense him sulking in the darkness.
‘Don’t you feel well?’ she asked. ‘No, I’m cold,’ he replied.
  ‘Dear me! I’m burning. It’s stiﬂing in here. Put the end of my skirts over your knees.’
  ‘Oh! your skirts,’ he muttered ill-humouredly. ‘I’m up to my eyes in your skirts.’
  But this remark made him laugh, and little by little he became more animated. She told him how frightened she had felt in the Parc Monceau. Then she confessed another of her longings: she would like one night to go for a row on the little lake in the gardens in the little boat she could see from her windows, moored at the edge of a pathway. He thought she was becoming sentimental. The cab rolled on, the darkness remained impenetrable, they leant forward to hear each other amid the noise of the wheels, touching one another when they moved and even inhaling one another’s warm breath when they approached too closely. At regular intervals Maxime’s cigar glowed afresh, creating a red blur in the darkness and casting a pale pink ﬂash over Renée’s face. She looked adorable in this ﬂeeting light; so much so that the young man was struck by it.
‘Oh!’ he said. ‘We’re looking very pretty this evening, stepmamma.
Let’s have a look.’
  He brought his cigar closer, and drew a few rapid puﬀs. Renée in her corner was lit up with a warm, palpitating light. She had raised her hood a little. Her bare head, covered with a mass of little curls, adorned with a simple blue ribbon, looked like a boy’s head over the black satin blouse that came up to her neck. She thought it great fun
  
to be examined and admired by the light of a cigar. She threw herself back tittering, while he added with an air of comic gravity:
  ‘My God! I’ll have to keep a close eye on you if I’m to bring you back safe and sound to my father.’
  The cab turned round the Madeleine and joined the ﬂow of traﬃc on the boulevards. Here it was ﬁlled with light, reﬂected by the bright shop windows. Blanche Muller lived close by in one of the new houses built on the raised ground of the Rue Basse-du-Rempart. There were very few carriages as yet at the door. It was only ten o’clock. Maxime wanted to drive down the boulevards and wait an hour,  but Renée, whose curiosity was growing, told him  that she would go up on her own if he did not accompany her. He followed her, and was glad to ﬁnd more people upstairs than he expected. Renée had put on her mask. Leaning on Maxime’s arm, and whispering peremptory orders to him, which he submissively  obeyed, she ferreted about in all the rooms, lifting the corners of the door-hangings and examining the furniture, and would even have  searched the drawers had she not been afraid of being seen.
  The apartment, though richly decorated, had Bohemian corners that immediately suggested the chorus-girl. It was here especially that Renée’s pink nostrils quivered, and that she made her companion walk slowly, so as to lose no particle of things or of their smell. She lingered in a dressing room left open by Blanche Muller, who, when she received her friends, gave up everything to them, even her alcove, where the bed was pushed aside to make room for card-tables. But the dressing room did not please her: she found it common, and even a little dirty, with its carpet covered with little round burns from cigarette-ends, and its blue silk hangings stained with pomade and splashed with soapsuds. Then, when she had fully inspected the rooms, and ﬁxed the smallest details of the place in her memory so as to describe them later to her friends, she moved on    to the guests. The men she knew; for the most part they were the same ﬁnanciers, the same politicians, the same young men-about-town who came to her Thursdays. She almost thought she was in her own drawing room, when she came face to face with a group of smiling dress-coats who, the previous evening, had worn the same smiles in her house when talking to the Marquise d’Espanet or the blonde Madame Haﬀner. Nor was the illusion completely dispelled when she looked at the women. Laure d’Aurigny was in yellow like
  

Suzanne Haﬀner, and Blanche Muller, like Adeline d’Espanet, wore a white dress that left half of her back completely bare. At last Maxime begged her to take pity on him, and she agreed to join him on a sofa. They stayed there a moment, the young man yawning, Renée asking him the ladies’ names, undressing them with her eyes, adding up the number of yards of lace they wore round their skirts. Seeing her absorbed in this serious study, he slipped away in response to a signal from Laure d’Aurigny. She teased him about the lady he was escorting. Then she made him swear to come and join them at the Café Anglais at one o’clock.
  ‘Your father will be there,’ she called to him, as he rejoined Renée. The latter found herself surrounded by a group of women laughing very loudly, while Monsieur de Saﬀré had taken advantage of the seat left vacant by Maxime to slip down beside her and pay her crude compliments. Next, Monsieur de Saﬀré and the women had all begun to shout and smack their thighs, so much so that Renée, quite
deafened, and beginning to yawn, rose and said to her companion: ‘Let’s go, they’re so boring!’
  As they were leaving, Monsieur de Mussy entered. He seemed delighted to meet Maxime and, paying no attention to the masked woman beside him, murmured with a lovesick air: ‘she’ll be the death of me. I know she’s feeling better, but she still won’t see me. Please tell her you saw me with tears in my eyes.’
  ‘Don’t worry, she’ll get your message,’ said the young man, with an odd laugh.
On the stairs he added:
‘Well, stepmamma, did the poor fellow touch you?’
  She shrugged without replying. Outside, on the pavement, she paused before getting into the cab, which had waited for them, and looked hesitantly towards the Madeleine and the Boulevard des Italiens. It was barely half-past eleven, and the boulevard was still very busy.
‘So we’re going home,’ she murmured regretfully.
  ‘Unless you want to take a drive along the boulevards,’ replied Maxime.
  She agreed. Her orgy of feminine curiosity was turning out badly, and she hated the idea of returning home disillusioned and with the beginnings of a headache. She had long imagined that an actresses’ ball would be great fun. There seemed to be a return of spring, as
  

happens sometimes in the last days of October; the night had a May warmth, and the occasional cool breeze added to the gaiety of the atmosphere. Renée, with her head at the window, remained silent, looking at the crowd, the cafés, and the restaurants as they scudded past. She had become very serious, lost in the vague longings that ﬁll the reveries of women. The wide pavement, swept by the prostitutes’ skirts and ringing with peculiar familiarity under the men’s boots, and over whose grey asphalt it seemed to her that the cavalcade of pleasure and brief encounters was passing, awoke her slumbering desires and made her forget the idiotic ball she had left, giving her a glimpse of other and more highly ﬂavoured pleasures. At the windows of the private rooms at Brébant’s, she saw the shadows of women on the white curtains. Maxime told her a very salacious story, of a husband who had noticed, on a curtain, the shadows of his wife and her lover in the act. She hardly listened. But he grew more excited, and ended by taking her hands and teasing her about poor Monsieur de Mussy.
  They turned back, and as they passed once more in front of Brébant’s she said suddenly: ‘Do you know, Monsieur de Saﬀré asked me to supper this evening.’
  ‘Oh! you wouldn’t have eaten very well,’ he replied, laughing. De Saﬀré hasn’t got the faintest idea about food. He hasn’t got past lobster salad.’
  ‘No, no, he mentioned oysters and cold partridge. But he addressed me as tu, and that annoyed me.’
  She stopped short, gazed again at the boulevard, and added after a pause, with an air of distress:
‘The worst of it is that I’m awfully hungry.’
  ‘What, you’re hungry!’ exclaimed the young man. ‘That’s very simple, we’ll go and have supper together. Would you like that?’
  He spoke quietly, but she refused at ﬁrst, declaring that Céleste had put out something for her to eat at home. In the meantime Maxime, who did not want to go to the Café Anglais, had stopped the cab at the corner of the Rue Le Peletier, in front of the Café Riche; he alighted, and as his stepmother still hesitated, he said:
  ‘If you’re afraid I might compromise you, do say so. I’ll sit next to the driver and take you back to your husband.’
  She smiled, and alighted from the cab like a bird afraid to wet its feet. She was radiant. The pavement she felt beneath her feet
  

warmed her heels and sent a delicious sensation of fear and gratiﬁed caprice quivering over her skin. In the cab she had had a mad longing to jump out on to the pavement. She crossed it with short steps, stealthily, as if her pleasure were heightened by the fear that she  might be seen. Her escapade was decidedly turning into an adventure. She certainly did not regret having refused Monsieur de Saﬀré’ s  crude invitation. But she would have come home terribly cross if Maxime had not thought of letting her taste forbidden fruit. He ran upstairs, as if he were at home. She followed him a little out of breath. A slight aroma of ﬁsh and game hung about, and the stair-carpet, secured to the steps with brass rods, had a smell of dust that increased her excitement.
  As they reached the ﬁrst landing they met a digniﬁed-looking waiter, who drew back to the wall to let them pass.
  ‘Charles,’ said Maxime, ‘you’ll wait on us, won’t you? Give us the white room.’
  Charles bowed, went up a few steps, and opened the door of a private room. The gas was lowered, it seemed to Renée as if she was penetrating into the half-light of a dubious and charming region.
  A continuous rumbling could be heard through the wide-open window, and on the ceiling, in the reﬂection cast by the café below, the shadows of the people in the street passed swiftly by. But with a twist of his thumb the waiter turned on the gas. The shadows on the ceiling disappeared, the room was ﬁlled with a crude light that fell full on Renée’s head. She had already thrown back her hood. The little curls had become slightly disarranged, but the blue ribbon was exactly as it was. She began to walk about, a little embarrassed by the way Charles looked at her; he blinked and screwed up his eyes to see her better, in a way that plainly suggested: ‘Here’s one I haven’t seen before.’
‘What would Monsieur like?’ he asked aloud. Maxime turned towards Renée.
  ‘Monsieur  de  Saﬀré’  s  supper  perhaps?’  he  asked.  ‘Oysters,  a partridge...’
  Seeing the young man smile, Charles discreetly imitated him, murmuring:
‘Wednesday’s supper, then, if that’s alright?’ ‘Wednesday’s supper...’ repeated Maxime. Then, remembering, he said:

 ‘Yes, I don’t care, give us Wednesday’s supper.’
  When the waiter had gone, Renée took her eyeglass and went inquisitively round the room. It was a square room in white and gold, furnished with the coquetry of a boudoir. Besides the table and chairs, there was a sort of low slab that served as a sideboard, and a wide divan, as large as a bed, that stood between the ﬁreplace and the window. A Louis XVI clock and candlesticks adorned the white marble mantelpiece. But the curiosity of the room was the huge, handsome mirror, which had been scrawled on by the ladies’ diamonds with names, dates, doggerel verses, high-blown sentiments, and amazing declarations. Renée thought she saw something ﬁlthy, but lacked the courage to satisfy her curiosity. She looked at the divan, feeling embarrassed again, and at last, trying to appear composed, gazed at the ceiling and the copper-gilt chandelier with its  ﬁve jets. But the uneasiness she felt was delicious. Looking up as if to examine the cornice, her eyeglass in her hand, she derived profound enjoyment from the suggestive furniture around her: from the limpid, cynical mirror whose pure surface, barely wrinkled by the ﬁlthy scrawls, had helped in the adjustment of so many false chignons; from the divan, whose width shocked her; from the table and even the carpet, in which she found the same smell as on the stairs, a subtle, penetrating, almost religious odour of dust.
  Then, when she was forced at last to lower her eyes, she asked Maxime:
‘What is Wednesday’s supper?’
‘Nothing,’ he replied. ‘A bet one of my friends lost.’
  In any other place he would have told her without hesitation that he had supped on Wednesday with a lady he had met on the boulevard. But since entering the private room he had instinctively treated her as a woman one seeks to please and whose jealousy must be spared. She did not insist; she went and leant on the window-rail, where he joined her. Behind them Charles came and went, with a sound of crockery and silverware.
  It was not yet midnight. On the boulevard below, Paris was still noisy, prolonging the day’s activity before deciding to go to bed. The rows of trees separated the whiteness of the pavement from the darkness of the roadway, on which the carriages rumbled along with their ﬂeeting lamps. On both edges of this dark belt the newsvendors’ kiosks shed their light from spot to spot, like great Venetian lanterns,
  

tall and fantastically variegated, set on the ground at regular intervals for some colossal illumination. But at this late hour their usually bright light was subdued and lost in the ﬂare of the shop-fronts. Not a shutter was up, the pavement stretched out without a line of shadow, under a shower of rays that covered it with a golden dust, with the warm, resplendent glare of daylight. Maxime showed Renée the Café Anglais, whose windows shone out in front of them. The lofty branches of the trees blocked their view a little when they tried to see the houses and pavement opposite. They leant over and looked down at the street. There was a continual coming and going; men walked past in groups, prostitutes in pairs dragged their skirts,  which they lifted up from time to time with a languid movement, casting weary, smiling glances around them. Right under the window, the tables of the Café Riche were spread out in the blaze of the gas lamps, whose brilliancy extended half across the roadway; and it was especially in the centre of this blaze that they saw the pale faces and empty smiles of the passers-by. Around the little tables were men and women mingled together, drinking. The girls wore showy dresses, their hair dressed low on their necks; they lounged about on chairs and made loud remarks, which the noise made inaudible. Renée noticed one in particular, sitting alone at a table, wearing a bright blue costume with white lace; leaning back in her chair, she ﬁnished, sip by sip, a glass of beer, her hands on her stomach, a heavy and resigned look of expectancy on her face. The women on foot disappeared slowly in the crowd, and Renée, intrigued, watched them go, gazing from one end of the boulevard to the other. The endless procession, a crowd strangely mixed and always alike, passed by with tiring regularity in the midst of the bright colours and patches of darkness, in the fairy-like confusion of the thousand leaping ﬂames that swept like waves from the shops, lending colour to the windows and the kiosks, running along the pavements in ﬁllets, in ﬁery letters and designs, piercing the darkness with stars, gliding endlessly along the roadway. The deafening noise had a roar, a prolonged monotonous rumbling, like an organ-note accompanying an endless procession of little mechanical dolls. Renée at one moment thought there had been an accident. There was a stream of people on the left, just beyond the Passage de l’Opéra. But, taking her eyeglass, she recognized the omnibus oﬃce. A crowd had gathered on the pavement, waiting, and rushing forward as soon as an omnibus

arrived. She heard the rough voice of the ticket collector calling out the numbers, followed by the tinkle of the bell. Her eyes lighted upon the advertisements on a kiosk, garishly coloured like Épinal prints; on a pane of glass, in a green-and-yellow frame, was the head of a grinning devil with hair on end, a hatter’s advertisement, which she could not understand. Every ﬁve minutes the Batignolles omnibus passed by, with its red lamps and yellow sides, turning the corner of the Rue Le Peletier, shaking the building as it went, and she saw the men on the upper deck look up at them with their tired faces, with the expectant look of famished people peering through a keyhole.
‘Ah!’ she said. ‘The Parc Monceau must be fast asleep now.’
  It was the only remark she made. They stayed there for nearly twenty minutes in silence, abandoning themselves to the intoxication of the noise and light. Then, the table having been laid, they sat down, and as Renée seemed embarrassed by the presence of the waiter, Maxime dismissed him.
‘You can leave us. I’ll ring for dessert.’
  Renée’s cheeks were slightly ﬂushed and her eyes sparkled, as if she had just been running. She brought from the window a little      of the din and animation of the boulevard. She would not let her companion close the window.
  ‘It’s like an orchestra!’ she said, when he complained of the noise. ‘Don’t you think it’s a funny sort of music? It’ll make a very good accompaniment to our oysters and partridge.’
  Her excitement made her seem younger than her thirty years. Her movements were quick and almost febrile, and this private room, this intimate supper with a young man amid the roar of the street, gave her the look of a prostitute. She attacked the oysters with gusto. Maxime was not hungry; he smiled as he watched her bolt her food. ‘God!’ he murmured. ‘You would have made a good supper-
companion.’
She stopped, annoyed with herself for eating so fast.
  ‘Do I seem hungry? What do you expect? It’s the hour we spent at that idiotic ball that exhausted me. Ah, my poor friend, I pity you for living in that sort of world!’
  ‘You know very well,’ he said, ‘that I’ve promised to give up Sylvia and Laure d’Aurigny on the day your friends agree to come and have supper with me.’
  

She made a haughty gesture.
  ‘I should think so! You must admit we’re more fun than those women. If one of us bored her lover as your Sylvia and Laure d’Aurigny must bore all of you, the poor thing wouldn’t keep him for a week! You’ll never listen to me. Just try it, one of these days.’
  Maxime, to avoid calling the waiter, rose, removed the oysters and brought over the partridge, which was on the slab. The table had the luxurious look of a ﬁrst-class restaurant. A breath of debauchery passed over the damask cloth, and Renée felt little thrills of pleasure as she let her slender hands wander from her fork to her knife, from her plate to her glass. She usually drank water barely tinged with claret, but now drank white wine neat. Maxime, standing with his napkin over his arm, and waiting on her with comical obsequiousness, resumed:
‘What can Monsieur de Saﬀré have said to make you so furious?
Did he tell you you were ugly?’
  ‘Oh,’ she replied. ‘He’s a nasty man. I couldn’t believe that a gentleman so distinguished, and so polite when he’s at my house, could have used such language. But I forgive him. It was the women that irritated me. You would have thought they were selling apples. There was one who complained of a boil on her hip, and I’m sure she wouldn’t have needed much encouragement to pull up her petticoat to show us.’
Maxime was splitting his sides with laughter.
  ‘No, really,’ she continued, getting worked up, ‘I can’t understand you men; those women are dirty and dull. And to think that when I saw you going oﬀ with Sylvia I imagined wonderful scenes, ancient banquets you see in paintings, with creatures crowned with roses, golden goblets, extraordinary voluptuousness. But all you showed me was a dirty dressing room and women swearing like troopers. That’s not worth committing any sins for.’
  He wanted to protest, but she silenced him, and holding between her ﬁngertips a partridge-bone, which she was daintily nibbling, she added in a softer tone:
  ‘Sin ought to be an exquisite thing, my dear. When I, a respectable woman, feel bored and commit the sin of dreaming of the impossible, I’m sure I think of much nicer things than all your Blanche Mullers.’
  Looking very serious, she concluded with this profound and frankly cynical remark:
  
 ‘It’s a question of education, you see.’
  She put the little bone gently on her plate. The rumbling of the carriages continued, with no clearer sound rising above it. She had had to raise her voice for him to hear her, and her ﬂushed cheeks grew even redder. On the slab there were still some truﬄes, a sweet, and some asparagus, which was out of season. He brought them      all over, so as not to have to get up again; and as the table was rather narrow, he placed on the ﬂoor between them a silver ice-bucket containing a bottle of champagne.  Renée’s  appetite  had  rubbed  oﬀ on him. They tasted all the dishes and emptied the bottle of champagne, launching into risqué theories and putting their elbows on the table like two friends pouring their hearts out while drinking. The noise on the boulevard was subsiding; but to Renée’s ears it seemed to increase, and at moments all the wheels of the carriages seemed to be whirling round in her head.
  When he spoke of ringing for dessert, she stood up, shook the crumbs from her long satin blouse, and said:
‘That’s it... You can light your cigar, if you want.’
  She was a little giddy. She went to the window, attracted by a peculiar noise she could not identify. The shops were closing.
  ‘Look,’ she said, turning towards Maxime, ‘the orchestra is thinning out.’
  She leant out again. In the middle of the road the coloured eyes of the cabs and omnibuses, now fewer and faster, were still crossing one another. But on either side, along the pavements, great pits of darkness had appeared in front of the closed shops. The cafés alone were still ablaze, streaking the asphalt with sheets of light. From the Rue Drouot to the Rue du Helder she could see a long line of black and white squares, in which the last stragglers sprang up and disappeared in a curious fashion. The prostitutes in particular, with their long-trained dresses, by turns garishly illuminated and immersed in darkness, seemed like apparitions, ghostly puppets moving across a ﬂoodlit stage-set. She amused herself for a moment with this sight. The gas jets were being turned out; the variegated kiosks stood out  in the darkness. From time to time a ﬂood of people, issuing from some theatre, passed by. But soon there was no one except, under the window, groups of men in twos or threes whom a woman accosted. They stood talking. Some of their remarks rose audibly in the subsiding din; and then the women generally walked oﬀ on the arm
  

of one of the men. Other girls wandered from café to café, strolled round the tables, pocketed the forgotten lumps of sugar, laughed with the waiters, and stared invitingly at the belated customers. And just after Renée had followed with her eyes the all but empty upper deck of a Batignolles omnibus, she recognized on the pavement the woman in the blue dress with the white lace, glancing about her, still in search of a customer.
  When Maxime came to fetch Renée from the window, he smiled as he looked towards one of the half-opened windows of the Café Anglais; the idea of his father having supper there struck him as amusing, but that evening he was under the inﬂuence of a peculiar form of modesty that interfered with his customary love of fun. Renée was reluctant to leave the window-rail. A feeling of intoxication and languor rose from the boulevard. In the low rumbling of the carriages and the extinguishing of the bright lights there was a summons to pleasure and to sleep. The whispering of the groups clustered in shadowy corners turned the pavement into the passageway of some great inn at the time when the guests repair to their beds. The glimmering lights and the noise continued to grow fainter and fainter, the city fell asleep, and a breath of love passed over the rooftops.
  When Renée turned round, the light of the little chandelier made her blink. She was a little pale now, and felt slight quivers at the corners of her mouth. Charles was putting out the dessert: he left the room, and came in again, opening and closing the door slowly, with the self-assurance of a man of the world.
  ‘But I’m not hungry any more!’ cried Renée. ‘Take all those plates away, and bring the coﬀee.’
  The waiter, accustomed to the whims of the ladies he  waited upon, cleared away the dessert and poured the coﬀee. He ﬁlled the room with his presence.
‘Do get rid of him,’ said Renée, who was feeling sick.
  Maxime dismissed him; but scarcely had he disappeared before he returned once again to draw the great window-curtains closely together. When he had at last withdrawn, the young man, growing impatient, stood up and, going to the door, said:
‘Wait a minute. I know how to keep him out.’ He pushed the bolt.
‘That’s it,’ she rejoined, ‘we’re alone at last.’

  They resumed their intimate conversation. Maxime had lit a cigar. Renée sipped her coﬀee and even indulged in a glass of chartreuse. The room grew warmer and became ﬁlled with blue smoke. She ended by leaning her elbows on the table and resting her chin between her half-closed ﬁsts. Under this slight pressure her mouth became smaller, her cheeks were slightly raised, and her eyes shone more brightly. Her rumpled little face looked adorable under the rain of golden curls that fell down over her eyebrows. Maxime looked at her through his cigar smoke. He thought her quaint. At times he    was no longer quite sure of her sex: the line on her forehead, her pouting lips, the look of slight uncertainty caused by her short-sightedness, made her almost like a young man, the more so as her long black satin blouse came up so high that one could barely see, under her chin, a line of plump white neck. She let herself be looked at, smiling, her head motionless, her eyes vacant, her lips still.
  Then she woke up with a start; she went and looked at the mirror towards which her dreamy eyes had been turning for the last few moments. She raised herself on tiptoe and placed her hands on the edge of the mantelpiece, to read the signatures, the coarse remarks that had startled her before supper. She spelled out the syllables with some diﬃculty, laughing, reading like a schoolboy turning the pages of a Piron in his desk.
  ‘ “Ernest and Clara,”’ she said, ‘and there’s a heart underneath that looks like a funnel. Ah! this is better: “I like men because I like truﬄes.” Signed, Laure. Tell me, Maxime, was it the d’Aurigny woman who wrote that? And here’s the coat-of-arms of one of these ladies, I imagine: a hen smoking a big pipe. And more names, the whole calendar of saints, male and female: Victor, Amélie, Alexandre, Édouard, Marguerite, Paquita, Louise, Renée... So there’s one named after me.’
  Maxime could see her face glowing in the glass. She raised herself still higher, and her domino, drawn more tightly behind, outlined her ﬁgure, the curve of her hips. The young man followed the line of satin, which ﬁtted her like a shirt. He stood up and threw away his cigar. He seemed ill at ease. He was missing something he was used to.
‘Ah! Here’s your name, Maxime,’ cried Renée. ‘ “I love...”’
  But he had sat down on the corner of the divan, almost at Renée’s feet. He seized her hands; he turned away from the mirror, and said in a peculiar voice:
  
 ‘Please don’t read that.’ She gave a nervous laugh.

 
‘Why not? Am I not your conﬁdante?’ But he insisted in a softer tone:
‘No, not tonight.’
  He still held her, and she tried to free herself with little jerks of  the wrist. There was a strange light in their eyes, a touch of shame in their long, strained smile. She fell on her knees beside the divan. They continued struggling, although she no longer made any eﬀort  to return to the mirror, and had already given in. As Maxime threw his arms round her, she said with her faint, embarrassed laugh:
‘Don’t, let me go... You’re hurting me.’
  It was the only sound that rose to her lips. In the profound silence of the room, where the gas seemed to ﬂare up higher, she felt the ground tremble and heard the clatter of the Batignolles omnibus turning the corner of the boulevard. The talking was over. When they resumed their positions, side by side on the divan, he stammered:
‘Well, it was bound to happen sooner or later.’
She said nothing. She examined the carpet as if numbed.
  ‘Had you ever dreamt this might happen?’ continued Maxime,  stammering even more. ‘I hadn’t for a moment. I ought to have mistrusted this private room.’
  But in a deep voice, as if all the bourgeois respectability of the Bérauds du Châtel had been awakened by this supreme sin, she muttered, her face aged and very serious:
‘This is terrible, what we have just done.’
  She was suﬀocating. She went to the window, drew back the curtains, and leant out. The orchestra had fallen silent; her sin had been committed amid the last quiver of the basses and the distant sound  of the violins, the vague, soft music of the boulevard asleep and dreaming of love. The roadway and pavement below stretched out and merged into grey solitude. All the rumbling cab-wheels seemed to have departed, carrying with them the lights and the crowd. Beneath the window the Café Riche was closed; no thread of light gleamed through the shutters. Across the road, shimmering lights lit up the front of the Café Anglais, one half-open window in particular, from which faint laughter could be heard. All along this ribbon of darkness, from the turn at the Rue Drouot to the other end, as far as her eyes could see, she saw nothing but the symmetrical blurs of the
  
kiosks staining the night red and green, without illuminating it, like nightlights placed at regular intervals in a giant dormitory. She looked up. The branches of the trees were outlined against a clear sky, while the uneven line of the houses petered out, like a rocky coast on the shore of a faint blue sea. But this belt of sky saddened her still more, and only in the darkness of the boulevard could she ﬁnd consolation. What lingered on the surface of the deserted road of the noise and vice of the evening made excuses for her. She thought she could feel the heat of the footsteps of all those men and women rising up from the pavement that was now growing cold. The shamefulness that had lingered there – momentary lust, whispered oﬀers, prepaid nights of pleasure – was evaporating, ﬂoating in a heavy mist dissipated by the breath of morning. Leaning out into the darkness, she inhaled the quivering silence, the alcove-like fragrance, as an encouragement from below, as an assurance of shame shared and accepted by a complicitous city. When her eyes had grown used to the dark, she saw the woman in the blue dress trimmed with lace standing in the same place, alone in the shadows, waiting and oﬀering herself to the empty night.
  Turning round, Renée saw Charles, who was looking round the room. He spotted Renée’s blue ribbon, lying crumpled and forgotten on a corner of the sofa. He politely handed it to her. Then she realized her own shame. Standing in front of the mirror, she clumsily tried to refasten the ribbon, but her chignon had slipped down, her little curls had ﬂattened on her temples, and she was unable to tie the bow.  Charles came to her aid, saying, as if he were oﬀering  some everyday thing, like a ﬁnger-bowl or a toothpick:
‘Would Madame like the comb?’
  ‘Oh no, don’t bother,’ interjected Maxime, giving the waiter an impatient look. ‘Go and call a cab.’
  Renée decided simply to pull down the hood of her domino. As she was about to leave, she again lightly raised herself to see the words which Maxime’s embrace had prevented her from reading. Slanting upwards towards the ceiling, in big, ugly handwriting, was the declaration, signed Sylvia: ‘I love Maxime.’ She bit her lips and drew her hood a little lower.
  In the cab they felt terribly awkward. They sat facing each other, as when they drove down from the Parc Monceau. They could think of nothing to say. The cab was extremely dark, and Maxime’s cigar
  

did not even mark it with a red dot, a glimmer of crimson charcoal. The young man, hidden again among the skirts, suﬀered from the gloom and the silence, from the silent woman he felt beside him, whose eyes he imagined he could see staring into the night. To  seem less awkward he reached for her hand and, when he held it      in his own, felt relieved. Soft, languid, the hand abandoned itself     to him.
  The cab crossed the Place de la Madeleine. Renée thought she was not to blame. She had not desired the incest. The more she thought about it, the more innocent she found herself, at the beginning of her escapade, at the moment of her stealthy departure from the Parc Monceau, at Blanche Muller’s, on the boulevard, even in the private room at the restaurant. Then why had she fallen on her knees next to the sofa? She could not imagine. She had anticipated nothing. She would have refused to give herself. It was just for fun, that’s all. As the cab rolled on, she rediscovered the deafening orchestra of the boulevard, the procession of men and women, while bars of ﬁre scorched her weary eyes.
  Maxime was also pondering things. He was angry at what had happened. He blamed the black satin domino. Whoever saw a woman rig herself out like that! You couldn’t even see her neck. He had taken her for a boy and romped with her, and it was not his fault that the game had become serious. He would not have laid a ﬁnger on her if she had shown even a tiny bit of her shoulders. He would have remembered that she was his father’s wife. Then, as he did not care for unpleasant thoughts, he forgave himself. Too bad! He would try not to do it again. It was all a lot of nonsense.
  The cab stopped, and Maxime got down ﬁrst to help Renée. But, at the little garden gate, he did not dare to kiss her. They shook hands as usual. She was already on the other side of the railing when, to say something, unwittingly confessing a preoccupation that had vaguely ﬁlled her thoughts since leaving the restaurant, she asked:
‘What is that comb the waiter mentioned?’
  ‘The comb,’ repeated Maxime, embarrassed. ‘I really don’t know.’ Renée suddenly understood. The room had a comb that formed part of its apparatus, like the curtains, the bolt, and the sofa. Without waiting for an explanation, which was not forthcoming, she plunged into the darkness of the Parc Monceau, walking quickly and thinking she could see behind her the tortoiseshell teeth in which Laure
  
d’Aurigny and Sylvia had left fair hair and black. She was now feeling very feverish. Céleste had to put her to bed and sit up with her till morning. Maxime stood for a moment on the pavement of the Boulevard Malesherbes, wondering whether he should join the party at the Café Anglais; then, thinking that he was punishing himself, he decided that he ought to go home to bed.
  The next morning Renée woke late from a deep sleep. She had a large ﬁre made, and said she would spend the day in her room. This was her refuge at times of diﬃculty. Towards midday, as her husband did not see her come down to breakfast, he asked if he could speak with her for a moment. She was about to refuse his request, with a touch of nervousness, when she thought better of it. The day before she had sent down to Saccard a bill from Worms for a hundred and thirty-six thousand francs, a rather high ﬁgure; and no doubt he wanted to pay her the courtesy of bringing her the receipt in person. She thought of the little curls of the day before. Mechanically she looked in the mirror at her hair, which Céleste had plaited into long tresses. Then she curled up by the ﬁre, burying herself in the lace of her dressing-gown. Saccard, whose rooms were also on the second ﬂoor, next to his wife’s, entered in his slippers, a husband’s privilege. He set foot barely once a month in Renée’s bedroom, and always concerning some delicate question of money. That morning he had the red eyes and pale complexion of a man who has not slept. He
kissed his wife’s hand.
  ‘Are you unwell, my dear?’ he asked, sitting down on the other side of the ﬁreplace. ‘A headache? Forgive me for coming to bother you with my business talk, but it’s rather serious.’
He drew Worms’s bill from the pocket of his dressing-gown.
Renée recognized the glazed paper.
  ‘I found this bill on my desk yesterday,’ he continued. ‘I’m very sorry, but I’m absolutely unable to pay it at present.’
With a sidelong look he watched the eﬀect his words had on her.
She seemed surprised. He resumed with a smile:
  ‘You know, my dear, I’m not in the habit of criticizing your purchases, though I must say that some items here surprised me somewhat. On the second page, for example: ball dress: material, seventy francs; making up, six hundred francs; money lent, ﬁve thousand francs; eau du Docteur Pierre, six francs. That seems rather expensive for a seventy-franc dress. But as you know, I understand every kind
  

of weakness. Your bill comes to a hundred and thirty-six thousand francs, and you have been almost moderate, comparatively speaking. But, as I say, I can’t pay it, I’m short of money.’
She held out her hand in a gesture of suppressed annoyance. ‘Very well,’ she said curtly, ‘give me the bill. I’ll think about it.’
  ‘I see you don’t believe me,’ murmured Saccard, enjoying his wife’s incredulity on the subject of his ﬁnancial embarrassment as if it were a personal triumph. ‘I’m not saying I’m in serious trouble,  but business is very shaky at present. Let me explain; you entrusted me with your dowry, and I owe it to you to be completely frank.’
  He put the bill on the mantelpiece, picked up the tongs, and began to stir the ﬁre. His passion for raking the cinders while talking business was a system that had become a habit. Whenever he came to a bothersome ﬁgure or phrase, he created a subsidence, which he then laboriously built up, gathering the logs together, collecting and heaping up the little splinters. Sometimes he almost disappeared into the ﬁreplace in search of a stray piece of charcoal. His voice grew faint, his listener lost patience, became more interested in his skilful constructions of glowing ﬁrewood, no longer listened to him, and as a rule went away defeated but satisﬁed. Even at other people’s houses he despotically took possession of the tongs. In summertime he played with a pen, a paperknife, or a penknife.
  ‘My dear,’ he said, with a great blow that sent the ﬁre ﬂying, ‘I am really sorry to have to say this. I have regularly made over to you the interest on the money you placed in my hands. I can even say, without hurting your feelings, that I’ve regarded that interest as your pocket money, and I have never asked you to contribute to the household expenses.’
  He paused. Renée felt uneasy as she watched him making a large hole in the cinders to bury the end of a log. He was about to make a delicate confession.
  ‘You see, I’ve had to make your money pay a high interest. You can rest assured, the principal is in good hands. As to the money coming from your property in the Sologne, it has been used partly to pay for this house; the rest is invested in an excellent company, the Société Générale of the Ports of Morocco. We haven’t got to settle the accounts yet, have we? I wanted to show you that we poor husbands are sometimes not appreciated.’
A powerful motive must have impelled him to lie less than usual.


The truth was that Renée’s dowry had been exhausted long ago; it had become a ﬁctitious asset in Saccard’s safe. Although he paid out interest on it at the rate of two or three hundred per cent or more, he could not have produced the least security or found the smallest solid particle of the original capital. As he half confessed, moreover, the ﬁve hundred thousand francs of the Sologne property had been used to pay a ﬁrst instalment on the house and the furniture, which together cost nearly two million. He still owed a million to the up-holsterer and the builders.
  ‘I don’t want to make any claims on you,’ Renée said at last. ‘I know I’m very much in your debt.’
  ‘Oh, my dear,’ he cried, taking his wife’s hand, without letting go of the tongs, ‘what a dreadful thing to say! Listen, the long and the short of it is that I have had some bad luck at the Bourse, Toutin-Laroche has got himself into a mess, and Mignon and Charrier are a pair of crooks. That’s why I can’t pay your bill. You will forgive me, won’t you?’
  He seemed genuinely upset. He dug the tongs in among the logs and made the sparks ﬂy up like ﬁreworks. Renée remembered how restless he had been recently. But she was unable to realize the amazing truth. Saccard had reached the point of having to perform a daily miracle. He lived like a king in a house that cost two million, but there were mornings when he had not a thousand francs in his safe. He did not seem to spend any less. He lived on debt among an army of creditors who swallowed up each day the scandalous proﬁts he made from his transactions. In the meantime companies crumbled beneath his feet, new and deeper holes yawned before him, over which he had to leap, unable to ﬁll them up. He thus trod over a mineﬁeld, living in a constant state of crisis, settling bills of ﬁfty thousand francs but leaving his coachman’s wages unpaid, marching on with ever-more regal assurance, emptying over Paris with increasing frenzy his empty cash-box, from which the golden stream with the fabulous source never stopped ﬂowing.
  The world of speculation was going through a diﬃcult period. Saccard was a worthy oﬀspring of the Hôtel de Ville. He had experienced the rapid transformations, the frenzied pursuit of pleasure,    the blindness to expense that had convulsed Paris. Now, like the City, he found himself faced with a huge deﬁcit which he had secretly to make good, for he would not hear of prudence, of economy, of a
  

peaceful and respectable existence. He preferred to keep up the useless luxury and real penury of the new boulevards, which had provided him with his colossal fortune which came into being every morning only to be swallowed up by nightfall. Moving from one adventure to the next, he now possessed only the gilded façade of missing capital. In this period of utter madness, Paris itself did not risk its future with greater rashness or hurry more directly towards every folly and every trick of ﬁnance. The settlement threatened to be disastrous.
  The most promising speculative ventures turned out badly in Saccard’s hands. As he said, he had just written oﬀ considerable losses at the Bourse. Toutin-Laroche had almost caused the Crédit Viticole to founder through a gamble for a rise that had suddenly turned against him; fortunately the Government, intervening secretly, had put the famous wine-growers’ mortgage loan-machine on its feet again. Saccard, badly shaken by this sudden blow, and taken to task by his brother for the danger that had threatened the delegation bonds of the City, which was involved with the Crédit Viticole, was even more unlucky in his real-estate speculations. The Mignon and Charrier pair had broken with him completely. If he accused them, it was because he was secretly furious at his mistake in having built on his share of the land while they prudently sold theirs. While they were making their fortunes, he was left with houses that he was only able to dispose of at a loss. He sold a house in the Rue de Marignan, on which he still owed three hundred and eighty thousand francs a year, for three hundred thousand francs. He had invented a trick that consisted in asking ten thousand francs a year for an apartment worth eight thousand at most. The terriﬁed tenant only signed a lease when the landlord had consented to forgo the ﬁrst two years’ rent. In this way the apartment was brought down to its real value, but the lease bore the ﬁgure of ten thousand francs a year, and when Saccard found a purchaser and capitalized the income from the house, the calculation became quite fantastic. He was not able to practise this swindle on a large scale: his houses could not be let; he had built them too early; the clearings in which they stood, lost in  the mud of winter, isolated them and considerably reduced their value. The aﬀair that had aﬀected him most was the crude trick played by Mignon and Charrier, who bought back from him the house on the Boulevard Malesherbes, the building of which he had
  
had to abandon. The contractors were at last smitten with the desire to inhabit their boulevard. As they had sold their share of the land above its value, and suspected that their former partner was in ﬁnancial diﬃculties, they oﬀered to relieve him of the enclosure in the middle of which the house stood, completed up to the ﬂooring of the second storey, whose iron girders were partly laid. But they referred to the solid freestone foundations as useless rubble, saying they would have preferred the land empty, to build on it as they wanted. Saccard was obliged to sell, without taking into account the hundred and odd thousand francs he had already spent, and what exasperated him even more was that the contractors refused to take the land back at two hundred and ﬁfty francs a metre, the ﬁgure agreed at the time of the division. They beat him down by twenty-ﬁve francs a metre, like second-hand clothes-women who pay only four francs for something they have sold for ﬁve the day before. Two days later Saccard was mortiﬁed to see an army of bricklayers invade the boarded enclosure and start building on the ‘useless rubble’.
  He was thus all the better able to play before his wife at being pressed for money, as his aﬀairs were becoming more and more complicated. He was not a man to confess from sheer love of the truth.
  ‘But, Monsieur,’ said Renée, with an air of scepticism, ‘if you’re in such ﬁnancial diﬃculty, why did you buy me that aigrette and necklace, which cost you, I believe, sixty-ﬁve thousand francs? I have no use for those jewels, and I shall have to ask your permission to dispose of them so as to give Worms something on account.’
  ‘Don’t do that!’ he cried anxiously. ‘If you weren’t seen wearing those diamonds at the Ministry ball tomorrow, people would start gossiping about my position.’
  He was in a genial mood that morning. He ended by smiling and murmuring with a wink:
  ‘We speculators, my dear, are like pretty women, we have our little tricks. Keep your aigrette and necklace, please, for my sake.’
  He could not tell the story, a very good one but a little risqué. After supper one night Saccard and Laure d’Aurigny had entered into an alliance. Laure was up to her ears in debt, and her one thought was to ﬁnd a gullible young man who would elope with    her and take her to London. Saccard, for his part, felt the ground crumbling under his feet; his beleaguered imagination sought an
  

expedient that would display him to the public sprawling on a bed of gold and banknotes. The courtesan and the speculator had come to an understanding in the semi-intoxication of dessert. He hit on the idea of a sale of diamonds that would have all Paris agog; it was then, with great ostentation, that he bought the jewels for his wife. With the product of the sale, about four hundred thousand francs, he managed to satisfy Laure’s creditors, to whom she owed nearly twice that amount. It is even presumed that he recouped part of his sixty-ﬁve thousand francs. When he was seen settling the lady’s aﬀairs, he was looked upon as her lover and believed to be paying her debts in full and committing extravagances for her. His credit revived wondrously. At the Bourse he was teased about his passion, with smiles and insinuations that delighted him. Meanwhile Laure d’Aurigny, brought into the limelight by all this fuss, though he had never spent a single night with her, pretended to deceive him with nine or ten idiots taken by the notion of stealing her from a man of such colossal wealth. Within a month she had two sets of furniture and more diamonds than she had sold. Saccard had got into the habit of going to smoke a cigar with her in the afternoon on leaving the Bourse; he often caught sight of coat-tails ﬂying through the doorways in terror. When they were alone, they could not look at each other without laughing. He kissed her on the forehead as though she were a depraved woman whose wickedness delighted him. He did not give her a sou, and on one occasion she even lent him money to pay a gambling debt.
  Renée tried to insist, and spoke of at least pawning the diamonds; but her husband gave her to understand that that was not possible, that Tout Paris expected to see her wearing them the next day. Then Renée, who was very worried about Worms’s bill, sought another way out of her diﬃculty.
  ‘But,’ she suddenly exclaimed, ‘my Charonne property is all right, isn’t it? You were telling me just the other day that the proﬁt would be superb. Perhaps Larsonneau would let me have a hundred and thirty-six thousand francs in advance?’
  Saccard had forgotten for a moment the tongs between his legs. He now seized them again, leant forward, and almost disappeared in the ﬁreplace, from where Renée heard him muttering indistinctly:
‘Yes, yes, Larsonneau might perhaps...’
She was at last coming, of her own accord, to the point towards

which he had been gently leading her since the beginning of the conversation. For two years he had been preparing his masterstroke in the Charonne district. His wife had never agreed to part with Aunt Élisabeth’s estate; she had promised to keep it intact, so as to leave it to any child she might have. Faced with this obstinacy, the speculator’s imagination had set to work, and ended by constructing a wonderful scheme. It was a work of exquisite villainy, a colossal piece of trickery, of which the City, the State, his wife, and even Larsonneau were to be the victims. He no longer spoke of selling the building-plots; but every day he deplored the folly of leaving them unproductive and contenting themselves with a return of two per cent. Renée, who was always in urgent need of money, began to entertain the idea of a speculative venture of some kind. Saccard based his calculations on the certainty of an expropriation for the cutting of the Boulevard du Prince-Eugène, the plans for which were not yet clearly resolved. It was then that he produced as a partner his old accomplice Larsonneau, who made the following agreement with his wife: she would buy the building-plots, representing a value of ﬁve hundred thousand francs, while Larsonneau would spend an equal sum on building on this ground a music-hall with a large garden, where games of all kinds, swings, skittle-alleys, and bowling-greens would be set up. The proﬁts were naturally to be divided, as the losses would be shared equally. In the event of one of the two partners wishing to withdraw, he could do so and claim his share, which would be determined by a valuation. Renée seemed surprised at the large ﬁgure of ﬁve hundred thousand francs, for the land was worth three hundred thousand at most. But Saccard explained to her that it was an ingenious plan for tying Larsonneau’s hands later on, as his buildings would never achieve that value.
  Larsonneau had become an elegant man-about-town, well-gloved, with dazzling linen and amazing cravats. To go on his errands he had a tilbury as light as a piece of clockwork, with a very high seat, and which he drove himself. He had a sumptuous suite of rooms in the Rue de Rivoli, in which there was not a single bundle  of papers or business document to be seen. His clerks worked at tables of stained pear-wood, inlaid with marquetry  and  adorned with chased brass. He called himself an expropriation agent, a new occupation which the transformation of Paris had brought into  being. His connection with the Hôtel de Ville enabled him to receive
  

advance information about the cutting of any new boulevard. When he had succeeded in learning the plan for a boulevard from one of the surveyors, he went and oﬀered his services to the landlords who would be aﬀected. He turned his little plan for increasing the compensation to account by acting before the decree of public utility was issued. As soon as the landlords accepted his proposals, he took all the expenses on himself, drew up a plan of the property, wrote a memorandum, followed up the case before the court, and paid a lawyer, all for a percentage of the diﬀerence between the City’s oﬀer and the compensation awarded by the Authority. But to this almost justiﬁable form of business he added several others. He lent money at interest. He was not a usurer of the old school, ragged and dirty, with eyes pale and expressionless as ﬁve-franc pieces, and lips white and drawn together like purse-strings. He was jovial, had a charming way of ogling the ladies, bought his clothes at Dusautoy’s, lunched at Brébant’s with his victim, whom he called ‘old man’, and oﬀered him Havanas at dessert. In reality, beneath his waistcoats tightly buckled round his waist, Larsonneau was a terrible gentleman; he would have insisted on the payment of a promissory note to the point of driving the creditor to suicide, and this without losing a grain of his amiability.
  Saccard would gladly have looked for another partner. But he was still worried about the false inventory, which Larsonneau jealously guarded. He preferred to involve him in the aﬀair, hoping to take advantage of some circumstance to regain possession of the compromising document. Larsonneau built  the  music-hall,  an  ediﬁce of planks and plaster surmounted by little tin turrets, which were painted bright red and yellow. The garden and the games proved successful in the populous district of Charonne. Within two years this speculative venture appeared prosperous, though in fact the proﬁts were very small. Saccard had so far always spoken enthusiastically to his wife of the prospects of this ﬁne idea.
  Renée, seeing that her husband showed no sign of coming out     of the ﬁreplace, where his voice was becoming more and more inaudible, said:
‘I’ll go and see Larsonneau today. It’s my only chance.’ Then he let go of the log with which he was struggling.
  ‘The errand’s done, my dear,’ he replied, smiling. ‘Don’t I anticipate all your wishes? I saw Larsonneau last night.’
  
   ‘Did he promise you the hundred and thirty-six thousand francs?’ she asked anxiously.
  He was building up between the two ﬂaming logs a little mountain of embers, picking up daintily with the tongs the smallest fragments of burnt wood, looking pleased with the mound he was skilfully constructing.
  ‘Oh! I don’t know about that!’ he murmured. ‘A hundred and thirty-six thousand francs is a lot. Larsonneau is a good sort, but his means are still limited. He’s quite ready to help you.’
  He paused, blinked, and rebuilt a corner of the great  mound which had collapsed. This pastime began to confuse Renée. In spite of herself she followed his work on the ﬁre, with which he seemed to be having more and more diﬃculty. She felt tempted to advise him. Forgetting Worms, the bill, and her need of money, she ﬁnally said:
‘Put that big piece at the bottom; then the others will stay up.’ Her husband did as she said, and added:
  ‘All he can ﬁnd is ﬁfty thousand francs. At least that will be useful to begin with. But he doesn’t want to mix this up with the Charonne aﬀair. He’s only a go-between, you see. The person lending the money is asking for an enormous rate of interest. He wants a promissory note for eighty thousand francs payable in six months.’
  Having crowned his great construction with a pointed cinder, he crossed his hands over the tongs and stared at his wife.
  ‘Eighty thousand francs!’ she cried. ‘But that’s sheer robbery! Are you advising me to do such a crazy thing?’
  ‘No,’ he replied simply. ‘But if you really need the money, I won’t forbid it.’
  He stood up as if to go. Renée, in a state of pained indecision, looked at her husband and at the bill, which he left on the mantelpiece. At last she took her poor head between her hands, murmuring: ‘Oh, these business aﬀairs! My head is splitting this morning.
Well, I must sign this note for eighty thousand francs. If I don’t I’ll become totally ill. I know what I’m like, I’d spend the whole day in a terrible state. I prefer to do something stupid straight away. It makes me feel better.’
  She spoke of ringing for a stamped bill. But he insisted on doing this for her personally. No doubt he had the bill in his pocket, for he was out of the room for barely two minutes. While she was writing at a little table he had pushed towards the ﬁre, he looked at her with a
  

kind of desire. The room was still full of the warmth of the bed she had just been sleeping in, and the fragrance of her ﬁrst toilet. While talking she had allowed the folds of her dressing gown to slip down, and her husband’s eyes, as he stood before her, glided over her bent head, through the gold of her hair, down to the whiteness of her neck and breasts. He wore a curious smile; the glowing ﬁre, which had burnt his face, the stiﬂing room, whose heavy atmosphere retained an odour of love, the yellow hair and white skin, which tempted him with a sort of conjugal scornfulness, set him dreaming, widened the scope of the drama in which he had just played a scene, and prompted some secret voluptuous calculation in his brutal jobber’s mind.
  When his wife handed him the acceptance, begging him to ﬁnish the matter for her, he took it without taking his eyes oﬀ her.
‘You’re bewitchingly beautiful,’ he murmured.
  As she bent forward to push away the table, he kissed her roughly on the neck. She gave a little cry. Then she stood up, quivering, trying to laugh, thinking in spite of herself of Maxime’s kisses the night before. But Saccard seemed to regret this unmannerly kiss.   He left her, squeezing her hand, and promised she would have the ﬁfty thousand francs that evening.
  Renée dozed all day before the ﬁre. At times of crisis she had the languor of a Creole. Her turbulent nature would then become indolent, chilled, numbed. She shivered, she needed blazing ﬁres, stiﬂing heat that brought little drops of perspiration to her forehead and soothed her. In this burning atmosphere, in this bath of ﬂames, she almost ceased to suﬀer; her pain became like a light dream, a vague oppression whose very vagueness became pleasurable. Thus she lulled till the evening the remorse of the day before, in the red glow of the ﬁrelight, in front of a terrible ﬁre that made the furniture  crack around her and at times made her quite unconscious of her existence. She was able to think of Maxime as of a ﬂaming pleasure whose rays burnt her; she had a nightmare of strange passions amid ﬂaring logs on white-hot beds. Céleste moved to and fro through the room, with her calm face, the face of a cold-blooded waiting-maid. She had orders to admit no one, she even sent away the inseparables, Adeline d’Espanet and Suzanne Haﬀner, who called after breakfasting together in a summer house they rented at Saint-Germain. However, when, towards the evening, Céleste came to tell her mis-
  
tress that Madame Sidonie, Monsieur’s sister, was asking to see her, she was told to show her up.
  Madame Sidonie did not usually call till dusk. Her brother had nevertheless prevailed upon her to wear silk gowns. But although the silk she wore came fresh from the shop, it never looked new; it was shabby and dull, and looked like a rag. She had also agreed not to bring her basket to the Saccards. As if in retaliation, her pockets bulged with papers. She took an interest in Renée, of whom she was unable to make a reasonable client, resigned to the necessities of life. She called on her regularly, with the discreet smiles of a doctor who does not wish to frighten his patient by telling her the name of her complaint. She commiserated with her in her little worries, treating them as slight aches and pains which she could cure in a minute if Renée wished. The latter, who was in one of those moods when one feels the need to be pitied, received her only to tell her that she had a terrible headache.
  ‘Oh! my beautiful creature,’ murmured Madame Sidonie as she glided through the shadows, ‘you must be suﬀocating in here! Still your migraine, is it? It comes from worry. You take things too much to heart.’
‘Yes, I have so many worries,’ replied Renée listlessly.
  Night was falling. She had not allowed Céleste to light the lamp. The ﬁre alone cast a great red glow that lighted her up fully, stretched out in her white dressing gown, whose lace was assuming pink tints. At the edge of the shadow one could just see a corner of Madame Sidonie’s black dress and her two crossed hands, covered with grey cotton gloves. Her soft voice came out of the darkness.
  ‘Money troubles again?’ she asked, as if she had said troubles of the heart, in a voice full of gentleness and compassion.
Renée lowered her eyes and nodded.
  ‘Ah! if my brothers listened to me, we would all be rich. But they just shrug when I mention that debt of three thousand million  francs. I’m still hoping, nevertheless. For the last ten years I’ve wanted to go across to England. I’m so busy, though! But I decided to write to London, and I’m waiting for a reply.’
As the younger woman smiled, she went on:
  ‘I know you think it’s all nonsense. But you’d be very pleased if one of these days I gave you a million francs. The story is very simple: there was a Parisian banker who lent the money to the king
  

of England, and as the banker died without direct heirs, the State is entitled to claim the debt back with compound interest. I’ve worked it out, it comes to over two thousand, nine hundred and forty-three million, two hundred and ten thousand francs. Don’t worry, it will come, it will come.’
  ‘In the meantime,’ said Renée, with a touch of irony, ‘I wish you would get someone to lend me a hundred thousand francs. Then I could pay my dressmaker, who is always pestering me.’
  ‘A hundred thousand francs can be found,’ calmly replied Madame Sidonie. ‘It’s just a question of what you’ll give in exchange.’
  The ﬁre was glowing; Renée, even more languid, stretched out her legs, showing the tips of her slippers at the end of her dressing gown. The agent resumed, in her gentle voice:
  ‘My poor dear, you’re really not reasonable. I know a lot of women, but I’ve never seen one take such little care of her health as you. That little Michelin woman, for instance, see how well she manages! I can’t help thinking of you whenever I see her in good health and spirits. Do you know that Monsieur de Saﬀré is madly in love with her and has already given her nearly ten thousand francs’ worth of presents? I think her dream is to have a house in the country.’
She grew excited, and fumbled in her pocket.
  ‘I’ve got a letter here from a poor young married woman. If we had some light, I’d let you read it. Her husband takes no notice of her. She had accepted some bills, and had to borrow the money from a gentleman I know. I went and rescued the bills from the bailiﬀ’s clutches. It was no easy matter. Those poor children, do you think they’ve done wrong? I receive them at home as if they were my son and daughter.’
  ‘Do you know anyone who would lend me the money?’ asked Renée casually.
  ‘I know a dozen. You’re too kind-hearted. Women can say anything to each other, can’t they? It’s not because your husband is my brother that I’d forgive him for running after other women and leaving a ﬁne woman like you to mope by the ﬁreside. That Laure d’Aurigny costs him a fortune. I wouldn’t be surprised if he’d refused you money. He has refused, hasn’t he? The wretch!’
  Renée listened complacently to this melliﬂuous voice coming out of the shadows like an echo of her own dreams. With her eyes half
  
closed, almost lying in her easy chair, she was no longer conscious of Madame Sidonie’s presence, she thought she was dreaming evil thoughts that had crept up on her to tempt her. The businesswoman kept up her prattle like the monotonous ﬂow of tepid water.
  ‘Madame de Lauwerens has spoilt things for you. You wouldn’t believe me. You wouldn’t be crying by the ﬁre if you’d trusted me. I’m extremely fond of you, you beautiful thing. What a delightful foot you have. You’ll laugh at me, but I must tell you how silly I am: when I’ve gone three days without seeing you, I feel I absolutely have to come and admire you; yes, I feel I want something: I feel the need to feast my eyes on your lovely hair, your face, so white and delicate, your slender ﬁgure... Really, I’ve never seen such a ﬁgure.’
  Renée began to smile. Even her lovers did not show such warmth, such ecstasy, in speaking to her about her beauty. Madame Sidonie noted the smile.
  ‘So it’s agreed,’ she said, standing up. ‘I go on and forget I’m giving you a headache. You’ll come tomorrow, won’t you? We’ll talk about the money, we’ll look for a lender... You must understand, I want you to be happy.’
  Still motionless, enervated by the heat, Renée replied after a pause, as if it had cost her a great eﬀort to understand what was being said to her:
  ‘Yes, I’ll come, and we’ll talk; but not tomorrow. Worms will be satisﬁed with an instalment. When he bothers me again, we’ll see... Don’t talk about it any more. My head’s bursting with all these business aﬀairs.’
  Madame Sidonie seemed rather put out. She was about to sit down again and resume her sweet-talk; but Renée’s weary attitude made her decide to postpone her attack till later. She took a handful of papers from her pocket, and searched among them until she found something enclosed in a sort of pink box.
  ‘I came to recommend a new soap,’ she said, resuming her business voice. ‘I take a great interest in the inventor, who’s a charming young man. It’s a very soft soap, very good for the skin. Try it, and tell your friends about it. I’ll leave it here, on the mantelpiece.’
  She had reached the door, when she returned once more, and standing erect in the crimson glow of the ﬁre, with her waxen face, she began to sing the praises of an elastic belt, an invention intended to replace corsets.
  

  ‘It gives you an absolutely round waist, a genuine wasp’s waist,’ she said. ‘I saved the inventor from bankruptcy. When you come you can try on the samples if you like. I had to run after the solicitors for a week. I’ve got the documents in my pocket, and I’m going straight to my bailiﬀ now to put a stop to a ﬁnal objection. Goodbye for now, darling. I’ll be expecting you: I want to dry those pretty eyes of yours.’
  She glided out of sight. Renée did not even hear her close the door. She stayed there before the dying ﬁre, still dreaming, her head full of dancing ﬁgures, hearing the distant voices of Saccard and Madame Sidonie oﬀering her large sums of money, like an auctioneer putting up a lot of furniture. She felt her husband’s rough kiss on her neck, and when she turned round she imagined the business-woman at her feet, with her black dress and her ﬂaccid face, making passionate speeches to her, praising her perfections, and begging for an assignation like a lover on the verge of despair. This made her smile. The heat in the room became more and more stiﬂing. Her stupor and her fantastic dreams were no more than an artiﬁcial slumber in which she kept seeing the little private room on the boulevard and the big sofa upon which she had fallen on her knees. She no longer felt the slightest distress. When she opened her eyes, the image of Maxime appeared in the crimson ﬁrelight.
  The next day, at the Ministry ball, the beautiful Madame Saccard was dazzling. Worms had accepted the ﬁfty thousand francs on account, and she emerged from her ﬁnancial straits with the laughter of convalescence. As she walked through the reception rooms in her great dress of pink faille with its long Louis XIV train, edged with deep white lace, there was a murmur, men jostled each other to see her. Her friends bowed low, smiling discreetly, paying homage to those beautiful shoulders, so well known in high society, and looked upon as the pillars of the Empire. She had bared her breasts with such contempt for the gaze of others, she walked so serenely in her nakedness, that it almost ceased to be indecent. Eugène Rougon, the great politician, felt that her breasts were even more eloquent than his speeches in the Chamber, softer and more persuasive in making people appreciate the charms of the Empire. He went up to his sister-in-law to compliment her on her happy stroke of audacity in lowering her bodice yet another inch. Almost all the Corps Législatif was there, and from the way the deputies looked at Renée, the minister
  
foresaw success the next day in the delicate matter of the loans of the City of Paris. It was impossible to vote against a power that produced, on the compost of millions, a ﬂower like Renée, such a strangely voluptuous ﬂower, with silken ﬂesh and statuesque nudity, a living joy that left in her wake the fragrance of pure pleasure. But what set the whole ballroom whispering was the necklace and aigrette. The men recognized the jewels. The women furtively drew each other’s attention to them with a glance. Nothing else was talked of the whole evening. The reception rooms stretched out in  the white light of the chandeliers, ﬁlled with a glittering throng like a medley of stars fallen into too conﬁned a space.
  At about one o’clock Saccard disappeared. He relished his wife’s triumph as a successful piece of theatre. He had once more consolidated his credit. A business matter required his presence at Laure  d’Aurigny’s; he went oﬀ, and begged Maxime to take Renée home after the ball.
  Maxime spent the evening dutifully with Louise de Mareuil, and both of them devoted themselves to saying shocking things about the women who passed to and fro. When they had uttered some coarser piece of nonsense than usual, they stiﬂed their laughter in their pocket-handkerchiefs. When Renée wanted to leave she had to come and ask Maxime for his arm. In the carriage she was nervous and giggly; she still quivered with the intoxication of light, perfumes,  and sounds that she had just passed through. She seemed to have forgotten their folly on the boulevard, as Maxime called it. She simply asked him, in an odd tone of voice:
‘Is that little hunchback Louise a lot of fun, then?’
  ‘Oh, yes,’ replied the young man, still laughing. ‘You saw the Duchesse de Sternich with a yellow bird in her hair, didn’t you? Well, Louise suggested it’s a clockwork bird that ﬂaps its wings every hour and cries, “Cuckold! Cuckold!” to the poor Duke.’
  Renée thought this schoolgirl pleasantry very amusing. When they reached home, as Maxime was about to say goodbye, she said:
  ‘Aren’t you coming up? I’m sure Céleste will have left something to eat.’
  He came up in his usual compliant fashion. There was nothing to eat upstairs, and Céleste had gone to bed. Renée had to light the tapers in a small three-branched candlestick. Her hand trembled   a little.
  

  ‘That foolish creature’, she said, speaking of her maid, ‘must have misunderstood what I told her. I’ll  never  be  able  to  undress  on my own.’
  She went into her dressing room. Maxime followed her, to tell her a fresh joke of Louise’s. He was as much at ease as if he had been loitering at a friend’s and was feeling for his cigar-case. But when Renée put down the candlesticks, she turned round and fell into the young man’s arms, speechless, gluing her mouth to his.
  Renée’s private apartment was a nest of silk and lace, a marvel of luxurious coquetry. A tiny boudoir led into the bedroom. The two rooms formed but one, or at least the boudoir was nothing more than the threshold of the bedroom, a large alcove, furnished with chaises-longues and with a pair of hangings instead of a door. The walls of both rooms were hung with the same material, a heavy pale-grey silk, ﬁgured with huge bouquets of roses, white lilac, and buttercups. The curtains and door-hangings were of Venetian lace over a silk lining of grey and pink bands. In the bedroom the white marble chimney-piece, a real jewel, displayed like a basket of ﬂowers its incrustations of lapis lazuli and precious mosaics, repeating the roses, white lilac, and buttercups of the tapestry. A large pink-and-grey bed, whose wood-work was hidden beneath padding and upholstery, and whose head stood against the wall, ﬁlled at least half the room with its ﬂow of drapery, its lace, and its silk ﬁgures with bouquets falling from the ceiling to the carpet. It was like a woman’s dress, rounded and slashed and decked with puﬀs and bows and ﬂounces; and the large curtain, swelling out like a skirt, brought to mind some tall, amorous girl, leaning over, swooning, almost falling back on the pillows. Beneath the curtains it was a sanctuary: cambric ﬁnely plaited, a snowy mass of lace, all sorts of delicate, diaphanous things immersed in semi-darkness. Compared to the bed, this monument whose devout ampleness recalled a chapel decorated for some festival, the rest of the furniture appeared insigniﬁcant: low chairs, a cheval-glass six feet high, presses with innumerable drawers. Underfoot, the carpet, blue-grey, was covered with pale, full-blown roses. On either side of the bed lay two big black bearskin rugs, edged with crimson velvet, with silver claws and with their heads turned towards the window, staring with their glass eyes at the empty sky.
  Soft harmony and muﬄed silence reigned in Renée’s bedroom. No shrill note, no metallic reﬂection, no bright gilding broke through
  
the dreamy melody of pink and grey. Even the chimney ornaments, the frame of the mirror, the clock, the little candlesticks, were of old Sèvres, and the mountings of copper-gilt were scarcely visible. Marvellous ornaments, the clock especially, with its ring of chubby Cupids who climbed and leaned over the dial-plate like a troop of naked urchins mocking the quick ﬂight of time. This subdued luxury gave the room a crepuscular light like that of an alcove with curtains drawn. The bed seemed to stretch out till the whole room became one immense bed, with its carpets, its bearskin rugs, its padded seats, its stuﬀed hangings, which continued the softness of the ﬂoor along the walls and up to the ceiling. As in a bed, Renée left upon all these things the imprint, the warmth and perfume of her body. When the double hangings of the boudoir were drawn aside, it seemed as if one were raising a silken counterpane and entering a huge bed, still warm and moist, where one found on the ﬁne linen the adorable shape, the slumber, and the dreams of a thirty-year-old Parisian woman.
  An adjoining closet, hung with antique chintz, was simply furnished on every side with tall rosewood wardrobes, containing an army of dresses. Céleste, always methodical, arranged the dresses according to their dates, and labelled them, introducing arithmetic into her mistress’s blue and yellow caprices. She kept this closet as calm as a sacristy and as clean as a stable. There was no furniture in the room, nothing was lying about, and the wardrobe doors shone cold and clean like the varnished panels of a brougham.
  But the wonder of  the  apartment,  the  room  that  was  the  talk of Paris, was the dressing room. People talked about ‘beautiful Madame Saccard’s dressing room’ in the same way that they talked about ‘the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles’. The room was situated in one of the towers, just above the little buttercup drawing room. On entering, one was reminded of a large circular tent, a magical tent, pitched in a dream by some lovelorn Amazon. In the middle of the ceiling a crown of chased silver supported the drapery of the tent, which curved upwards to the walls, whence it fell straight down to the ﬂoor. This drapery, these rich hangings, consisted of pink silk covered with very thin muslin, plaited in wide folds at regular intervals. A band of lace separated the folds, and wrought silver beading ran from the crown and down the hangings along the edges of the bands. The pink and grey of the bedroom grew brighter
  

here, became pink and white, like naked ﬂesh. Beneath this bower  of lace, under these curtains that hid the whole ceiling except for      a pale blue cavity inside the narrow circle of the crown, where Chaplin had painted a laughing Cupid looking down and preparing his dart, one would have thought oneself at the bottom of a candy-box, or in some precious jewel-case enlarged as if to display a woman’s naked body instead of the brilliancy of a diamond. The carpet, white as snow, stretched away without the least pattern or ﬂower. There was a cupboard with plate-glass doors, whose two  panels were inlaid with silver; a chaise-longue, two ottomans, some white satin stools; and a great washstand with a pink marble slab and legs hidden under ﬂounces of muslin and lace. The glasses on the wash-stand, the bottles and the basin were of antique Bohemian crystal, streaked pink and white; and there was yet another table, inlaid with silver like the looking-glass cupboard, on which all the paraphernalia and toilet utensils were laid out, like the contents of a fantastic surgeon’s case, displaying a large number of little instruments of puzzling purpose, back-scratchers, nail-polishers, ﬁles of all shapes and sizes, scissors straight  and  curved,  every  type  of  tweezer  and pin. Each of these items, of silver and ivory, bore Renée’s monogram.
  The dressing room had a delightful corner which, in particular, made it famous. In front of the window the folds of the tent parted and disclosed, in a kind of long, shallow alcove, a bath, a basin of pink marble sunk into the ﬂoor, with sides ﬂuted like those of a large shell and rising to the level of the carpet. Marble steps led down into the bath. Above the silver taps, shaped like swans’ necks, the back of the alcove was ﬁlled with a Venetian mirror, frameless, with curved edges and a ground design on the crystal. Every morning Renée took a long bath. This ﬁlled the dressing room for the whole day with moisture, with the fragrance of fresh, wet ﬂesh. Sometimes an unstoppered scent-bottle, or a cake of soap left out of its dish, struck a more violent note in this languorous atmosphere. Renée was fond of staying there till midday, almost naked. The round tent was naked too. The pink bath, the pink slabs and basins, the muslin of the walls and ceiling, under which pink blood seemed to course, had the curves of ﬂesh, the curves of shoulders and breasts; and, according to the time of day, one would have imagined the snowy skin of a child or the warm skin of a woman. It was redolent of nudity. When Renée
  
emerged from it, her fair-skinned body added a little more pink to all the pink ﬂesh of the room.
  Maxime undressed Renée. He understood these things, and his quick hands divined pins and glided round her waist with instinctive ease. He undid her hair, took oﬀ her diamonds, dressed her hair for the night. He added caresses and amusing little remarks to the performance of his duties as lady’s-maid and hairdresser, and Renée laughed, with a broad stiﬂed laugh, while the silk of her bodice cracked and her petticoats were loosened one by one. When she saw herself naked, she blew out the tapers of the candlestick, caught Maxime round the waist, and all but carried him into the bedroom. The ball had completed her intoxication. In her fever she was conscious of the previous day spent in a stupor by the ﬁre, a day of vague and pleasant dreams. She could still hear the harsh voices of Saccard and Madame Sidonie, calling out ﬁgures like bailiﬀs. These were the people who overwhelmed her, who drove her to crime; and even now, when she sought his lips in the depths of the vast, dark bed, she still saw his image in the ﬁrelight the day before, looking at her with burning eyes.
  The young man did not leave until six in the morning. She gave him the key to the little gate in the Parc Monceau, and made him swear to come back every night. The dressing room communicated with the buttercup drawing room by a servant’s staircase hidden in the wall, which connected all the rooms in the tower. From the drawing room it was easy to pass into the hothouse and the gardens. Leaving at dawn in a thick fog, Maxime was a little bewildered by his adventure. He accepted it, however, with his epicene complacency. ‘Too bad!’ he thought. ‘That’s what she wanted. She’s got a wonderful body; and she was right, she’s twice as good in bed as Sylvia.’ They had drifted towards incest since the day when Maxime, in his threadbare schoolboy tunic, had hung on Renée’s neck, creasing her guardsman’s coat. From that time onwards there had been a slow, inexorable perversion of their relationship.  The strange education the young woman gave the child; the familiarity that made them friends; later on, the laughter and audacity of their shared secrets: all this dangerous promiscuity had ended by binding them together in such a way that the pleasure of friendship approached carnal indulgence. They had given themselves to each other for years; the animal act was simply the culmination of this unconscious malady of
  

passion. In the maddened world in  which  they  lived,  their  sin  had sprouted as on a dunghill oozing with strange juices; it had developed with strange reﬁnements amid special conditions of perversion.
  When the great calash carried them to the Bois and bore them gently along the pathways, their whispering of ﬁlthy remarks into each other’s ears, their attempt to recall the instinctive bad behaviour of their childhood, was but a digression, and a tacit gratiﬁcation of their desires. They felt vaguely guilty, as if they had slightly touched one another; and even this ﬁrst sin, this languor born of smutty conversations, though it wearied them with a voluptuous fatigue, titillated them even more than plain, positive kisses. Their familiarity was thus the slow progress of two lovers, and was inevitably bound to lead them one day to the private room in the Café Riche and to Renée’s great pink-and-grey bed. When they found themselves in each other’s arms, they did not even feel the shock of sin. They might have been two old lovers, whose kisses were full of memories, and who had spent so many intimate hours together that, in spite of themselves, they talked of their past, which was full of their unconscious feelings for each other.
  ‘Do you remember the day I arrived in Paris?’ said Maxime. ‘You were wearing such a funny dress, and I drew an angle on your chest with my ﬁnger and advised you to cut the bodice in a point. I felt your skin under your blouse, and my ﬁnger went in a little. It was very nice.’
Renée laughed, kissed him, and  murmured:
  ‘You were already quite corrupt. You made us laugh at Worms. Do you remember? We used to call you our little toy man. I always thought that that fat Suzanne would have let you do anything, if the Marquise hadn’t kept such a close eye on her.’
  ‘Yes, we had some good laughs,’ murmured Maxime. ‘The photograph album, and all the rest, our drives through Paris, the cakes we had on the boulevard; you remember those little strawberry tarts you were so fond of? I’ll never forget the afternoon when you told me the story of Adeline at the convent, when she wrote letters to Suzanne and signed herself Arthur d’Espanet, like a man, and proposed to elope with her.’
  The lovers laughed again over this story; and then Maxime continued in his childlike voice:
  
   ‘When you came to fetch me from school in your carriage, we must have looked funny. I used to disappear under your skirts, I was so little.’
  ‘Yes, yes,’ she stammered, beginning to tremble, and drawing Maxime towards her, ‘it was quite wonderful. We loved each other without knowing it, didn’t we? I knew it before you did. The other day, driving back from the Bois, I just touched your leg, and gave a start. But you didn’t notice anything, you weren’t thinking of me,  were you?’
  ‘Oh yes,’ he replied, somewhat embarrassed. ‘But I didn’t know, you see. I didn’t dare.’
  He was lying. The idea of making love to Renée had never occurred to him. He had touched her with all his pervertedness, without really desiring her. He was too weak to make the eﬀort. He accepted Renée because she forced herself upon him, and he had slipped into her bed without willing or foreseeing it. Having found himself there, he had stayed because it was warm, and because he usually remained at the bottom of every pit he fell into. At the beginning he even felt quite pleased with himself. She was the ﬁrst married woman he had had. He did not consider the fact that her husband was his father.
  But Renée brought into her sin all the passion of a confused mind. She too had slipped down the slope. But she had not rolled to the bottom like a mass of inert ﬂesh. Lust had been awakened in her when it was too late to resist, and the fall had become inevitable. This fall suddenly seemed to her a necessary consequence of her boredom, a rare and supreme pleasure, which alone was able to rouse her weary senses, her bruised heart. It was during that autumn drive in the twilight, when the Bois was falling asleep, that the vague idea of incest came to her like a titillation that sent a rare thrill over her skin; and in the evening, in the semi-intoxication of the dinner, provoked by jealousy, this idea became more precise, rose up before her, amid the ﬂames of the hothouse, as she stood watching Maxime and Louise. At that moment she craved sin, the sin no one commits, the sin that was to ﬁll her empty existence and transport her at last to that hell of which she was still afraid, as in the days when she was a little girl. Then, the next day, through a strange feeling of remorse and lassitude, her craving had left her. It seemed to her that she had already sinned, that it was not as pleasant as she had imagined, and
  

that it would really be too disgusting. The crisis was bound to be inevitable, to come naturally, without the help of these two beings, these comrades who were destined one ﬁne evening to unite in a sexual embrace when they imagined they were shaking hands. But after this simple fall, she returned to her dream of a nameless pleasure, and then she received Maxime back into her arms, curious about him, curious about the cruel delights of a passion she regarded as a crime. She willed the incest, demanded it, resolved to taste it to the end, even to the point of remorse, should that ever come. She was fully aware of what she was doing. She pursued her passion as a woman of fashion, with the prejudices of a woman of the bourgeoisie, with all the struggles, joys, and world-weariness of a woman drowning in self-disgust.
  Maxime came back every night. He came through the garden at about one o’clock. Usually Renée would wait for him in the hot-house, which he had to go through to reach the little drawing room. They were absolutely shameless, ignoring the most elementary precautions of adultery. This corner of the house, it is true, belonged to them. Only Baptiste, Saccard’s valet, had the right to enter, and he disappeared as soon as his duties were over. Maxime even claimed, with a laugh, that he withdrew to write his memoirs. One night, however, just after Maxime had arrived, Renée pointed out Baptiste walking through the drawing room with a candlestick in his hand. The tall valet, with his diplomatic ﬁgure, lit by the yellow light of the taper, wore that evening an even more correct and severe expression than usual. Leaning forward, the lovers saw him blow out his candle and go towards the stables, where the horses and grooms lay sleeping.
‘He’s doing his rounds,’ said Maxime.
  Renée shivered. Baptiste always made her uncomfortable. She said one day that he was the only respectable man in the house, with his coldness and his unblinking gaze that was never directed at women. After that they were more careful. They closed the doors of the little drawing room and were thus able to use this room, the hot-house, and Renée’s own rooms without being disturbed. It was a world in itself. There they tasted, during the ﬁrst few months, the most reﬁned delights. They made love in all the rooms, moving from the great pink-and-grey bed of the bedroom to the pink-and-white nudity of the dressing room and to the symphony in pale yellow of
  
the little drawing room. Each room, with its particular odour, its hangings, its special life, gave them a diﬀerent form of passion and made Renée a diﬀerent kind of lover: she was dainty and pretty in her padded aristocratic couch, where, in the warm bedroom, love became a matter of good taste; under the ﬂesh-coloured tent, amid the perfumes and the humid languor of the bathroom, she became a capricious, carnal courtesan, yielding as soon as she emerged from the bath: this was how Maxime preferred her; then, downstairs, in the bright sunrise of the little drawing room, in the yellow halo that gilded her hair, she became a goddess, with her fair Diana-like head, her bare arms which assumed chaste postures, her unblemished body which reclined on the couches in attitudes revealing noble outlines of antique grace. But there was one place that almost frightened Maxime, where Renée dragged him on bad days, when she needed   a more acrid form of intoxication. This place was the hothouse. It was there that they tasted incest.
  One night, in an hour of anguish, Renée sent her lover for one of the black bearskin rugs. Then they lay down on this inky fur, at the edge of an ornamental pond, in the large circular pathway. Outside it was freezing in the clear moonlight. Maxime had arrived shivering, his ears and ﬁngers numb. The hothouse was heated to such a point that he fainted on the bearskin. Coming from the dry, biting cold into such intense heat, he felt a smarting sensation as if he had been whipped with a birch-rod. When he came to, he saw Renée on her knees, leaning over him, with staring eyes and an animal-like attitude that alarmed him. Her hair hanging down, her shoulders bare, she leant on her wrists, with her back arched, like a great cat with phosphorescent eyes. The young man, lying on his back, noticed over the shoulders of this adorable, passionate beast the marble sphinx, its haunches gleaming in the moonlight. Renée had the attitude and smile of the monster with a woman’s head and, in her loosened petticoats, looked like the white sister of this black divinity. Maxime remained supine. The heat was suﬀocating, a sultry heat that did not fall from the sky in a rain of ﬁre, but trailed on the ground like a poisonous exhalation, its steam rising like a storm-laden cloud. A warm dampness covered the lovers with dew, with burning perspiration. For a while they were unable to move or speak, Maxime prostrate and inert, Renée quivering on her hands as on supple, nervous hams. Through the little panes of the hothouse they
  

could catch glimpses of the Parc Monceau, clumps of trees with ﬁne black outlines, lawns white as frozen lakes, a whole dead landscape whose exquisiteness and light, even tints were reminiscent of Japanese prints. The burning couch on which the lovers lay seethed strangely in the midst of the great, silent cold.
  They spent a night of passion. Renée was the man, the ardent, active partner. Maxime remained submissive. Smooth-limbed, slim, and graceful as a Roman stripling, fair-haired and pretty, stricken in his virility since childhood, this epicene creature became a girl in Renée’s arms. He seemed born and bred for perverted sensual pleasure. Renée enjoyed her domination, bending to her will this creature of indeterminate sex. For her this relationship brought continual experiments, new sensations, strange feelings of uneasiness and keen enjoyment. She was no longer certain: she felt doubts each time she returned to his delicate skin, his soft neck, his attitudes of abandonment, his fainting ﬁts. She then experienced an hour of repletion. By revealing to her new forms of ecstasy, Maxime crowned her mad outﬁts, her prodigious luxury, her life of excess. He ingrained into her ﬂesh the high-pitched note already singing in her ears. He was a lover who matched the follies and fashions of the age. This pretty young man, whose frail ﬁgure could be seen by his clothes, this eﬀeminate creature that strolled along the boulevards, his hair  parted in the middle, with little bursts of laughter and bored smiles, became in Renée’s hands one of those corrupting, decadent inﬂuences that, at certain periods among rotten nations, lead to the exhaustion of the body and the unhinging of the brain.
  It was in the hothouse especially that Renée assumed the masculine role. The night of passion they spent there was followed by many others. The hothouse loved and burned with them. In the heavy atmosphere, in the pale light of the moon, they saw the strange world of plants moving confusedly around them, exchanging embraces. The black bearskin stretched across the pathway. At their feet the tank steamed, full of a thick tangle of plants, while the pink petals of the water-lilies opened out on the surface, like virgin bodices, and the tornelias let their bushy tendrils hang down like the hair of swooning water-nymphs. Around them the palm trees and the tall Indian bamboos rose up towards the domed roof, where they bent over and mingled their leaves with the postures of exhausted lovers. Lower down the ferns, the pterides, and the alsophilas were like
  
green ladies, with wide skirts trimmed with symmetrical ﬂounces, standing mute and motionless at the edge of the pathway, waiting for some romantic encounter. By their side the twisted, red-streaked leaves of the begonias and the white, spear-headed leaves of the caladiums provided a vague series of bruises and pallors, which the lovers could not understand, though at times they discerned curves as of hips and knees, prone on the ground beneath the brutality of blood-stained kisses. The banana trees, bending under the weight of their fruit, spoke to them of the rich fecundity of the earth, while the Abyssinian euphorbias, whose prickly, deformed stems, covered with loathsome excrescences, they glimpsed in the shadows, seemed to exude sap, the overﬂowing ﬂux of this ﬁery gestation. But by degrees, as their glances penetrated into the corners of the hothouse, the darkness became ﬁlled with a more furious debauch of leaves and stalks; they could not distinguish on the terraces between the marantas, soft as velvet, the gloxinias, purple-belled, the dracoenas, like blades of old lacquer; it was a great dance of living plants pursuing one another with unsatisﬁed fervour. In the corners, where curtains of creepers closed in the arbours, their carnal fancy grew madder still, and the supple shoots of the vanilla plants, of the Indian berries, the quisqualias, and bauhinias were like the strangely elongated arms of unseen lovers madly prolonging their embraces so as to collect all scattered delights. Those endless arms drooped with weariness, entwined in a spasm of love, sought each other, closed together like a crowd in rut. It  was  the  boundless  copulation  of  the  hothouse,  of this patch of virgin forest ablaze with tropical ﬂora and foliage.
  Maxime and Renée, their senses perverted, felt carried away in these mighty nuptials of the earth. The ground burnt their backs through the bearskin, and drops of heat fell upon them from the  lofty palms. The sap that rose in the tree-trunks penetrated them, ﬁlling them with a mad longing for immediate growth, for gigantic procreation. They joined in the copulation of the hothouse. It was then, in the pale light, that they were stupeﬁed by visions, by night-mares in which they watched the embraces of the ferns and palms; the foliage assumed confused and mysterious shapes, which their  desires transformed into sensual images; murmurs and whispers reached them from the shrubbery, faint voices, sighs of ecstasy, stiﬂed cries of pain, distant laughter, all that was audible in their own embraces and came back to them as an echo. At times they thought
  

they were at the centre of an earthquake, as if the ground beneath them had burst into voluptuous sobs in a paroxysm of satisﬁed desire.
  If they had closed their eyes, if the stiﬂing heat and pale light had not distorted their senses, the scents would have been enough to throw them into an extraordinary state of excitement. The pond saturated them with a deep, pungent odour, through which passed  the thousand perfumes of the ﬂowers and plants. At times the vanilla plant sang with dove-like cooings; then came the rough notes of the stanhopeas, whose striped throats have the putrid breath of convalescent invalids. The orchids, in baskets suspended by wire chains, emitted their exhalations like living censers. But the dominant scent, in which all these vague breaths were intermingled, was a human  scent, a scent of love, which Maxime recognized when he kissed  Renée on the neck and plunged his head into her ﬂowing hair. They lay intoxicated with this scent of an amorous woman, which trailed through the hothouse as through an alcove in which the earth itself was giving birth.
  As a rule the lovers lay down under the Madagascan tanghin tree, the poisonous shrub whose leaf Renée had once bitten. Around them the white statues laughed as they gazed at the mighty copulation of foliage. The moon, as it revolved, displaced the groups and gave life to the drama with its changing light. They were a thousand miles from Paris, from the easy life of the Bois and oﬃcial receptions, in a corner of an Indian forest, of some monstrous temple of which the black marble sphinx had become the deity. They felt themselves rolling towards crime, towards a cursed love, towards the caresses of wild beasts. All the natural growth that surrounded them, the teeming tank, the naked immodesty of the foliage, threw them into a deep, Dantesque inferno of passion. It was then, in the depths of this glass cage, boiling in the summer heat, lost in the keen December cold, that they relished their incest, as if it were the criminal fruit of an overheated soil, with the dull fear of this terrifying hotbed.
  In the middle of the black bearskin Renée’s body seemed whiter, as she crouched like a great cat, her back arched, her wrists tense like supple, nervous hams. She was swollen with desire, and the clear  outline of her shoulders and hips stood out with feline clarity against the splash of ink with which the rug blackened the yellow sand of the pathway. She gloated over Maxime, this prey lying beneath her,
  
completely under her spell. From time to time she leant forward suddenly and kissed him with her swollen mouth. Her mouth  opened with the hungry, bleeding brilliancy of the Chinese hibiscus, which covered the side of the house. She became like one of the exotic plants in the hothouse. Her kisses bloomed and faded like the red ﬂowers of the great mallow, which last scarcely a few hours and are endlessly renewed, like the bruised, insatiable lips of a giant Messalina.



CHAPTER V

Saccard was haunted by the kiss he had planted on his wife’s neck . He had long ceased to avail himself of his marital rights; this had happened naturally, neither of them caring about a connection that inconvenienced them. Saccard would never think of returning to Renée’s bedroom unless some good piece of business were the ultimate aim of his conjugal devotion.
  The Charonne venture was progressing well, though he was still anxious about its outcome. Larsonneau, with his dazzling shirt-front, had a way of smiling which he did not like. He was just a go-between, a man of straw, whose assistance he paid for by giving him a commission of ten per cent on his proﬁts. But although the expropriation agent had not put a sou into the enterprise, and  Saccard had not only found the money for the music-hall but had taken every precaution –– a deed of retrocession, undated letters, pre-dated receipts –– the latter remained apprehensive, and felt a pre-sentiment of treachery. He suspected his accomplice of planning to blackmail him by using the false inventory he had carefully pre-served, and which alone he had to thank for his share in the  business.
  So the two men shook hands. Larsonneau addressed Saccard as ‘master’. He deeply admired this acrobat, and watched his performances on the tightrope of speculation with the eye of a connoisseur. The idea of hoodwinking Saccard appealed to him greatly. He was nursing a plan, as yet vague, for he did not know how to use the weapon he possessed, lest he should do himself damage with it.     He felt too that he was at his former colleague’s mercy. The land and the buildings, which the cunningly prepared inventories already estimated at nearly two million, though they were not worth a quarter of that amount, would be swallowed up in a great crash if the expropriation fairy failed to touch them with her magic wand. According to the original plans, which they had been able to consult, the new boulevard, opened to connect the artillery park at Vincennes with the Prince-Eugène Barracks, and to bring the guns into the heart of Paris while avoiding the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, cut oﬀ part of the land; but there was still the risk that it would be only
  
slightly aﬀected and that the ingenious plan for the music-hall might fall through because of its sheer boldness. In that case Larsonneau would be left stranded. Still, despite the secondary role he was compelled to play, this did not prevent him from feeling disgusted when he thought of the paltry ten per cent he was to pocket in this huge  robbery. At these moments he could not resist a furious longing to stretch out his hand and carve a slice for himself.
  Saccard had not even allowed him to lend money to his wife, taking pleasure himself in this piece of theatre, which satisﬁed his weakness for complicated transactions.
  ‘No, no, my dear fellow,’ he said, with his Provençal accent, which he exaggerated whenever he wanted to add spice to a joke, ‘we mustn’t get our accounts mixed up. You’re the only man in Paris I’ve sworn never to owe money to.’
  Larsonneau contented himself with hinting that his wife was a spendthrift. He advised him not to give her another sou, so that     she might make over the property to them at once. He would have preferred to do business with Saccard alone. He tested him out occasionally, and even went so far as to say to him, with his languid and indiﬀerent man-about-town manner:
  ‘All the same, I’ll have to put my papers in order. Your wife frightens me, old man. I don’t want to have seals put on some of the documents at my oﬃce.’
  Saccard was not the sort of man to take kindly to insinuations of this sort, especially as he was well acquainted with the cold, meticulous orderliness of Larsonneau’s oﬃce. His whole cunning little being revolted against the fear this great yellow-gloved fop sought to inspire in him. He shuddered when he thought of the possibility of a scandal; and he saw himself brutally exiled by his brother, and living in Belgium engaged in some shabby little trade. One day he grew angry and went so far as to address Larsonneau as tu:
  ‘Look here,’ he said, ‘you’re a decent chap, but it would be a good idea if you handed over that document, or we’ll end up quarrelling over it.’
  Larsonneau feigned surprise, pressing his ‘master’s’ hands and assuring him of his devotion. Saccard regretted his momentary impatience. It was at this time that he began to think seriously of resuming marital relations with his wife; he might need her in any conﬂict with his accomplice, and he told himself that business matters
  

are wonderfully easy to talk over in bed. That kiss on the neck tended little by little to reveal an entirely new policy.
  But he was in no hurry, he husbanded his resources. He spent the whole winter hatching his plan, involved in a hundred diﬀerent projects, each more complicated than the other. It was a terrible winter for him, full of surprises, a prodigious campaign during which he had to ﬁght oﬀ bankruptcy every day. Far from cutting down his domestic expenses, he gave party after party. But if he overcame every obstacle, he was forced to neglect Renée, holding her in reserve for a triumphant stroke when the Charonne operation came to fruition.
  He contented himself with preparing the dénouement by continuing to give her no money except through Larsonneau. When he had  a few thousand francs to spare, and she complained of her poverty, he brought them to her, saying that Larsonneau’s people required a promissory note for twice as much. This farce amused him greatly, the story of the promissory notes delighting him because of the air of romance they imparted to the aﬀair. Even during the period of his biggest proﬁts he had served out his wife’s income in a very irregular fashion, giving her princely presents, throwing her handfuls of banknotes, and then for weeks leaving her just a paltry amount. Now that he found himself in dire straits, he spoke of the household expenses, treating her like a creditor to whom one is unwilling to confess one’s ruin, gaining time by making excuses. She barely listened to him; she signed anything, sorry that she was not able to sign more.
  Already,  however,  he held two hundred thousand francs’ worth  of her promissory notes, which had cost him barely one hundred  and ten thousand francs. After having these notes endorsed by Larsonneau, to whom they were made out, he put them prudently into circulation, intending to use them as decisive weapons later on. He would never have been able to hold out to the end of that terrible winter, lending money to his wife like a usurer and keeping up his domestic expenses, had it not been for the sale of his building-plots on the Boulevard Malesherbes, which Mignon and Charrier bought from him in cash, deducting a huge discount.
  For Renée this same winter was a time of joy. She suﬀered only from a lack of ready money. Maxime proved a great expense; he still treated her as his stepmother, and let her pay wherever they went.
  
But this secret poverty was for her one more delight. She taxed her ingenuity and racked her brains so that ‘her dear child’ would want for nothing; and when she had persuaded her husband to ﬁnd her a few thousand francs, she ran through them with her lover in costly frivolities, like two schoolboys let out on their ﬁrst escapade. When they had spent the last sou they stayed at home, revelling in the great piece of masonry built with such new and insolent luxury. The father was never there. The lovers sat by the ﬁreside more often than before. The fact was that Renée had at last ﬁlled the emptiness of those gilded ceilings with the satisfaction of her desires. The disorderly house of worldly pleasure had become a chapel in which she secretly practised a new religion. Maxime struck in her not merely the shrill note that matched her extravagant costumes; he was a lover fashioned for this house, with its windows more like those of a department store and its ﬂow of sculpture from the attic rooms down to the cellars; he gave life to all this plaster, from the two chubby Cupids in the courtyard, who exuded a sheet of water from their shell, to the great naked women who supported the balconies and played with apples and ears of corn amid the pediments; he gave meaning to the ornate hall, the narrow garden, the dazzling rooms which contained too many armchairs and not a single work of art. Renée, who had been bored to death in this house, began suddenly to take pleasure in it, using it as she might use something whose purpose she had not at ﬁrst understood. It was not only in her own rooms, in her buttercup drawing room and in the hothouse that she pursued her love, but throughout the whole house. She even ended by taking her pleasure on the divan in the smoking room; she lingered there, saying that the room had a vague and very agreeable smell of tobacco.
  She had two reception days every week now instead of one. On Thursdays anyone who wanted could call. But Mondays were reserved for bosom friends. Men were excluded. Maxime alone was admitted to these select gatherings, which took place in the little drawing room. One evening she had the startling idea of dressing him up as a woman and introducing him as her cousin. Adeline, Suzanne, the Baronne Meinhold, and the other ladies present rose and greeted him, astonished at his face, which they vaguely recognized. Then, when they realized, they burst out laughing and absolutely refused to let the young man go and undress. They kept
  

him with them in his skirts, teasing him and indulging in risqué jokes. When he had seen these ladies out by the front door, he went through the gardens and returned through the hothouse.  Renée’s dear friends never had the slightest suspicion. The lovers could not be more intimate than they already were when they declared themselves the closest of companions. If a servant happened to see them pressing rather close together in the doorways, he was not surprised, being accustomed to the playfulness of Madame and the son of Monsieur.
  This complete sense of freedom and impunity emboldened them still further. They bolted the door at night, but in the daytime they kissed in every room in the house. On rainy days they invented a thousand little games. But Renée’s great delight was still to make an enormous ﬁre and doze oﬀ before the grate. Her linen was marvellously luxurious that winter. She wore vastly expensive chemises and dressing gowns, whose cambric and lace insertions barely covered her with a cloud of white smoke. In the red glow of the ﬁre she lay as though naked, with pink lace and skin, the heat penetrating through the thin stuﬀ to her ﬂesh. Maxime, crouched at her feet, kissed her knees without even feeling the cambric, which had the warmth and colour of her beautiful body. The daylight hardly came in, it fell like twilight into the grey silk room, while Céleste went quietly to and fro behind them. She had become their natural accomplice. One morning, when they had overslept, she discovered them together but remained utterly impassive. They then abandoned all restraint, she came in at all hours without the sound of their kisses causing her to turn her head. They relied on her to warn them in case of danger. They did not buy her silence. She was a very economical, respectable girl, and had never been known to have a lover.
  However, Renée had not shut herself away. Taking Maxime with her, like a fair-haired page in dress-clothes, she threw herself into the life of high society, where she tasted even keener pleasures. The society season was a long triumph for her. Never had she imagined bolder costumes or headdresses. It was then that she had the courage to wear her famous satin dress the colour of bushes on which a complete deer-hunt was embroidered, with its accessories –– powder horns, hunting horns, and broad-blade knives. It was then too that she set the fashion for wearing hair in the classical style; Maxime was sent to make sketches for her at the Musée Campana, which had
  
been recently opened. She seemed younger, she was at the height of her turbulent beauty. Incest lent a ﬁery glow to her eyes and warmed her laughter. Her eyeglass looked supremely insolent at the tip of her nose, and she glanced at the other women, at her dear friends preening themselves with the enormity of some vice or other, with the air of a boastful adolescent, with a ﬁxed smile that said: ‘I have my crime.’
  Maxime considered high society utterly tedious. It was to seem ‘smart’ that he pretended to be so bored, for he did not really enjoy himself anywhere. At the Tuileries, at the ministers’ houses, he disappeared behind Renée’s skirts. But he resumed the reins as soon as there was a possibility of some escapade. Renée wanted to see the private room on the boulevard again, and the width of the sofa made her smile. Then he took her to all sorts of places, to the houses of courtesans, to the Opera ball, to the stage-boxes of burlesque theatres, to every dubious place where they could rub shoulders with pure vice and delight in their anonymity. When they stealthily returned home, worn out, they fell asleep in each other’s arms, sleeping oﬀ the intoxication of obscene Paris, with snatches of ribald couplets still ringing in their ears. The next day Maxime imitated the actors, and Renée, seated at the piano in the little drawing room, tried to reproduce the raucous voice and jaunty attitudes of Blanche Muller as La Belle Hélène. Her convent music lessons now only helped her to murder the verses of the new burlesque songs. She detested serious compositions. Maxime made fun of German music with her, and felt it his duty to go and hiss at Tannhäuser both by conviction and in defence of his stepmother’s sprightly refrains.
  One of their great delights was skating; that winter skating was fashionable, the Emperor having been one of the ﬁrst to try the ice on the lake in the Bois de Boulogne. Renée ordered a complete Polish suit from Worms, in velvet and fur; she made Maxime wear doeskin boots and a foxskin hat. They arrived at the Bois in intense cold, which stung their lips and noses as if the wind had blown ﬁne sand into their faces. They thought it was fun to feel cold. The Bois was quite grey, snow threading the branches with narrow strips of lace. Under the pale sky, above the frozen lake, only the ﬁr trees on the islands still displayed, on the horizon, their theatrical drapery, on which the snow had stitched broad bands of lace. They darted along through the icy air, like swallows skimming the ground. With one
  

hand behind their backs and one on each other’s shoulder, they sped along erect and smiling, turning in circles, in the wide space marked out by thick ropes. The sightseers stared at them from the roadway. From time to time they went and warmed themselves at the burning braziers by the side of the lake. Then they shot oﬀ again, describing wider circles, their eyes watering with pleasure and cold.
  Then, when springtime came, Renée’s feelings of melancholy returned. She made Maxime stroll with her at night in the Parc Monceau in the moonlight. They went into the grotto, and sat on the grass in front of the colonnade. But when she expressed a desire for a row on the little lake, they found that the boat they could see from the house, moored at the edge of a pathway, had no oars. These were evidently removed at night. This was a disappointment. Moreover, the great shadows in the gardens made the lovers anxious. They would have liked a Venetian carnival to be given there, with red lanterns and a band. They preferred it in the daytime, in the afternoon, and often they stood at one of the windows of the house to watch the carriages following the graceful curve of the main avenue. They enjoyed looking at this charming corner of the new Paris, this clean, pleasant bit of nature, these lawns like pieces of velvet, interspersed with ﬂower-beds and shrubs, and bordered with magniﬁcent white roses. Carriages passed by, as numerous as on the boulevards; the ladies on foot trailed their skirts languorously, as though they  were walking across their drawing room carpets. They commented across the greenery on the diﬀerent fashions, pointed to the horses, taking genuine pleasure in  the  soft  colours  of  this  great garden. A scrap of gilded railing ﬂashed between two trees, a ﬂock of ducks swam across the lake, the little Renaissance bridge stood out white and new amid the foliage, while on either side of the big avenue, mothers, sitting on yellow chairs, chatted and forgot their little boys and girls, who looked at each other coyly.
  The lovers adored the new Paris. They often drove through the city, going out of their way in order to pass along certain boulevards, which they loved with a personal aﬀection. The tall houses, with their great carved doors and heavy balconies, with inscriptions, signs, and company names in great gold letters, delighted them. As the brougham rolled on, they gazed fondly at the wide pavements, with their benches, their variegated columns, and their slim trees. This bright gap, which stretched as far as the horizon, grew narrower
  
and opened upon a pale-blue square of space; this uninterrupted double row of big shops, where the shopmen smiled at their fair customers, these currents of stamping, swarming crowds, ﬁlled them with absolute contentment, with a feeling of perfection in the life of the streets. They loved even the jets of the water-hoses, which passed like white vapour before their horses, spreading out and falling like ﬁne rain under the wheels of the brougham, darkening the ground and raising a light cloud of dust. They drove on, and it seemed to them that the carriage was rolling over carpets along the straight, endless roadway, which had been made solely to save them from the dark backstreets. Every boulevard became a corridor of their house. The sun played on the new façades, lit up the window-panes, fell upon the awnings of the shops and cafés, and heated the asphalt under the busy footsteps of the crowd. When they returned home, a little confused by the dazzle and hubbub of these bazaars, they took renewed pleasure in the Parc Monceau, which was the ﬂower-bed of this new Paris, displaying its luxury in the ﬁrst warmth of spring.
  When fashion absolutely forced them to leave Paris they went to the seaside, but regretfully, still dreaming of the boulevard pavements while on the ocean shores. Their love subsided there. It was a ﬂower of the hothouse, and needed the great grey-and-pink bed, the naked ﬂesh of the dressing room, the gilded dawn of the little drawing room. Alone in the evenings, gazing at the sea, they no longer had anything to say to each other. Renée tried to sing her collection of songs from the Théâtre des Variétés at an old piano that was on its last legs in a corner of her room at the hotel; but the instrument, damp with the breezes from the open sea, had the melancholy sound of the water. La Belle Hélène sounded fantastic and lugubrious. Renée consoled herself by astonishing the people on the beach with her wonderful costumes. Her own crowd was there, yawning, waiting for winter, casting about in despair for a bathing costume that would not make them look too ugly. Renée could never get Maxime into  the water. He was horribly frightened of it, turning quite pale when the tide came near to his boots, and on no account would have approached the edge of a cliﬀ; he kept away from the sand-holes and made long detours to avoid the least bit of steep beach.
  Saccard came down once or twice to see ‘the children’. He had all sorts of problems to contend with, he said. It was not until October,
  

when they were all three in Paris, that he thought seriously of sleeping again with his wife. The Charonne aﬀair was coming to a head. His plan was very simple. He proposed to capture Renée by the same trick that he would have played on a prostitute. She was beset by an increasing need of money, and was too proud to ask her husband for help except as a last resort. Saccard resolved to take advantage of her ﬁrst request for money to win her favours, and to resume their long-severed relations in the delight brought about by the payment of a large debt.
  Terrible problems awaited Renée and Maxime in Paris. Several of the promissory notes made out to Larsonneau were overdue; but as Saccard naturally left them lying on the bailiﬀ’s desk, they did not worry his young wife unduly. She was far more alarmed by her debt to Worms, which now amounted to nearly two hundred thousand francs. He insisted on a deposit, and threatened to stop her credit. She shuddered at the thought of the scandal of a lawsuit, and especially of a quarrel with the illustrious dressmaker. Moreover, she needed some pocket money. They would be bored to death, Maxime and she, without a few louis to spend every day. The dear child was quite broke since he had begun to rummage vainly in his father’s drawers. His ﬁdelity, his exemplary behaviour during the last seven or eight months, were largely due to the fact that his purse was totally empty. He rarely had twenty francs with which to take a girl out to supper, and so he philosophically used to return to the house. Renée, on each of their escapades, handed him her purse so that he might pay at the restaurants, balls, and boulevard theatres. She continued to treat him as a child; she even paid, with the tips of her gloved ﬁngers, at the pastry-cook’s, where they stopped almost every afternoon to eat little oyster patties. In the morning he often found  in his waistcoat a few louis he did not know he had, and which she had put there, like a mother ﬁlling a schoolboy’s pockets. To think that this charming life of odd snacks, of satisﬁed whims and facile pleasures, was to end! But a still greater fear took hold of them. Sylvia’s jeweller, to whom Maxime owed ten thousand francs, grew angry and talked of prison. The costs had so accumulated on the acceptances he had in hand and had long protested, that the debt had increased by some three or four thousand francs. Saccard declared ﬂatly that he could do nothing. A spell in Clichy would settle Maxime down, and when he took him out he would make a great
  
fuss about his paternal generosity. Renée was in despair; she imagined her dear child in prison, in a veritable dungeon, lying on damp straw. One night she seriously proposed to him not to leave her again, to live there unknown to everyone, safe from the bailiﬀ’s men. Then she swore she would ﬁnd the money. She never spoke of the origin of the debt, of Sylvia who conﬁded her aﬀairs to the mirrors of private rooms. She wanted about ﬁfty thousand francs, ﬁfteen thousand for Maxime, thirty thousand for Worms, and ﬁve thousand for pocket money. Then they would have two weeks of happiness before them. She embarked on her campaign.
  Her ﬁrst thought was to ask her husband for the ﬁfty thousand francs. She did not ﬁnd this easy. The last time he came to her room to bring her money, he had planted fresh kisses on her neck and had taken her hands and talked of his aﬀection. Women have a very subtle sense that enables them to guess men’s feelings, and so she was prepared for a demand, for a tacit bargain clinched with a smile. Indeed, when she asked him for the ﬁfty thousand francs, he protested, saying that Larsonneau would never lend such an amount, that he himself was still too short of ready cash. Then, changing his tone, as if seized with sudden emotion, he murmured:
  ‘I can’t refuse you anything. I’ll do the rounds and achieve the impossible. I want you to be happy, my dear.’
  Putting his lips to her ear, kissing her hair, his voice trembling slightly, he said:
  ‘I’ll bring it to your room tomorrow evening... without any promissory note.’
  She interrupted him, saying that she was in no hurry, that she did not want to put him to so much trouble. Saccard, who had just put all his heart into the dangerous ‘without any promissory note’, which he had let slip and now regretted, pretended not to have received an unpleasant rebuﬀ. He stood up, and said:
‘Well, as you wish... I’ll get the money for you when you want it.
Larsonneau will have nothing to do with it. It’s a present.’
  He smiled good-naturedly. Renée remained in a state of anguish. She felt that she would lose the little peace of mind she had left if she gave herself to her husband. What remained of her pride lay in the fact that she was married to the father but was the wife of the son. Often, when Maxime seemed distant, she tried by very obvious allusions to make him realize the situation; but the young man,
  

whom she expected to see fall at her feet after this revelation, remained utterly indiﬀerent, thinking no doubt that she was trying   to reassure him about the possibility of bumping into his father in the grey silk room.
  When Saccard had left she dressed quickly and had the horses put to. In the brougham on the way to the Île Saint-Louis, she rehearsed how she would ask her father for the ﬁfty thousand francs. She threw herself into this sudden idea without discussing it, feeling herself a great coward at heart, terriﬁed at the thought of the step she was taking. When she arrived, the courtyard of the Hôtel Béraud froze her with its dreary, cloistral dampness, and she felt like running away as she climbed the wide stone staircase, on which her little high-heeled boots rang out ominously. She had been foolish enough in her haste to choose a costume of feuillemorte silk, with long ﬂounces of white lace, trimmed with satin bows and cut crosswise by a plaited sash. This dress, which was ﬁnished oﬀ with a little ﬂat toque with a large white veil, struck such an odd note in the gloom of the staircase that she became conscious of the strange ﬁgure she cut there. She trembled as she walked through the austere array of huge rooms, in which the vague ﬁgures of the tapestry seemed surprised at the sight of this ﬂow of skirts passing through the twilight.
  She found her father in a drawing room that looked out on the courtyard. He was reading a big book placed on a desk fastened to the arms of his armchair. At one of the windows sat Aunt Élisabeth, knitting with long wooden needles; and in the silence of the room the clicking of the needles was the only sound to be heard.
  Renée sat down, ill at ease, unable to move without disturbing   the severity of the lofty ceiling with a noise of rustling silk. Her   lace looked crudely white against the dark background of tapestry and old-fashioned furniture. Monsieur Béraud du Châtel gazed at her with his hands resting on the edge of his reading desk. Aunt Élisabeth mentioned the imminent wedding of Christine, who was about to marry the son of a very well-to-do solicitor; she had gone shopping with an old family servant; and the aunt talked on all by herself, in her placid voice, her needles in perpetual motion, chatting away about her domestic aﬀairs and casting smiling glances at Renée over her spectacles.
  But Renée became more and more uneasy. The silence of the whole house weighed on her shoulders, and she would have given a
  
lot for the lace of her dress to have been black. Her father’s look made her so uncomfortable that she thought Worms really ridiculous to have thought of such wide ﬂounces.
  ‘How smart you lookl!’ said Aunt Élisabeth suddenly. She had not even noticed her niece’s lace yet.
  She stopped knitting and adjusted her spectacles in order to see better. Monsieur Béraud du Châtel smiled faintly.
  ‘It’s rather white,’ he said. ‘A woman must feel very uncomfortable in that on the pavements.’
  ‘But we don’t go out on foot!’ exclaimed Renée, immediately regretting this spontaneous cry.
  The old man made as if to reply. Then he rose, drew himself up to his full height, and walked slowly up and down, without giving his daughter another look. Renée remained pale with emotion. Each time she told herself to be courageous, and waited for an opportunity to broach the question of money, she felt a twinge in her chest.
‘We never see you now, father,’ she complained.
  ‘Oh!’ replied the aunt, without giving her brother time to open his mouth, ‘your father never goes out, except to go to the Jardin des Plantes. And I have to get cross with him before he’ll do that! He says he gets lost in Paris, that the city is no longer ﬁt for him. You really should give him a good talking to!’
  ‘My husband would be very pleased to see you at our Thursdays from time to time,’ continued Renée.
  Monsieur Béraud du Châtel took a few steps in silence. Then he said softly:
  ‘Please thank your husband for me. He seems to have a huge amount of energy, and I hope for your sake that he conducts his business honestly. But we see things diﬀerently, and I don’t feel comfortable in that grand house of yours.’
Aunt Élisabeth seemed annoyed by his reply:
  ‘How silly men are with their politics!’ she said. ‘Shall I tell you the truth? Your father is furious with both of you because you go to the Tuileries.’
  But the old man shrugged, as if to imply that his dissatisfaction had much more serious causes. He started pacing up and down again, lost in thought. Renée was silent for a moment, with the request for the ﬁfty thousand francs on the tip of her tongue. Then she was overcome again with cowardice, kissed her father, and left.
  

  Aunt Élisabeth went with her to the stairs. As they walked through the suite of rooms, she carried on chattering in her thin, old woman’s voice:
  ‘You’re happy. I’m so pleased to see you looking well and so beautiful; if your marriage had turned out badly, you know, I would have blamed myself. Your husband loves you, you have all you want, haven’t you?’
  ‘Of course,’ replied Renée, forcing herself to smile, but feeling sick at heart.
Aunt Élisabeth held her back, her hand on the balustrade.  ‘There’s one thing that worries me, and it’s that you might go mad
with all this happiness. Be careful, and above all don’t sell any of your property. If you had a baby one of these days, you’d have a little fortune ready for it.’
  When Renée was back in her brougham, she heaved a sigh of relief. Drops of cold sweat stood out on her temples; she wiped them oﬀ, thinking of the icy damp of the Hôtel Béraud. Then, when the brougham rolled into the bright sunshine of the Quai Saint-Paul, she remembered the ﬁfty thousand francs, and all her suﬀering came back, more poignant than ever. She, who was thought so daring, what a coward she had just been! Yet it was a question of Maxime, of her freedom, of their pleasure in being together! Amid the reproaches she heaped on herself, an idea suddenly occurred to her that threw her into even greater despair: she should have mentioned the ﬁfty thousand francs to Aunt Élisabeth on the stairs. What had she been thinking of? She would perhaps have lent her the money, or at least have helped her. She was leaning forward to tell her coach-man to drive back to the Rue Saint-Louis-en-l’Île, when the vision of her father walking slowly through the gloomy drawing room reappeared. She would never have the courage to go back there. What would she say to explain a second visit? At the bottom of her heart, she felt she no longer even had the courage to mention the matter to Aunt Élisabeth. She told the coachman to take her to the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonnière.
  Madame Sidonie uttered a cry of delight when she saw her opening the discreetly curtained door of the shop. She was there by chance, and was just going out to run to the court where she was suing a customer. But she would let the judgement go by default, she would try again another day; she was so happy that her sister-in-law had felt
  
like paying her a little visit at last. Renée, looking embarrassed, smiled at her. Madame Sidonie refused to allow her to stay downstairs; she took her up to her room, by way of the little staircase, after removing the brass knob from the shop-door. She removed and replaced this knob, which was held by a single nail, twenty times a day.
  ‘There, my dear,’ she said, making her sit down on a chaise-longue, ‘now we can have a nice chat. Just fancy, you came just in time. I was coming to see you this evening.’
  Renée, who knew the room, experienced the vague sense of unease a traveller feels on ﬁnding that some trees have been felled in a favourite forest walk.
‘Ah,’ she said at last, ‘you’ve moved the bed, haven’t you?’
  ‘Yes,’ the lace-dealer replied quietly, ‘one of my customers prefers it facing the mantelpiece. She was the one who advised me to get red curtains.’
  ‘That’s what I was thinking, the curtains weren’t red. It’s a very common colour, red.’
  She held up her eyeglass and looked round the room, which had the luxurious appearance of a big furnished hotel. On the mantel-piece she saw some long hairpins, which had certainly not come from Madame Sidonie’s meagre chignon. In the place where the bed used to stand, the wallpaper was torn, discoloured, and soiled by the mattress. The businesswoman had tried to hide this eyesore behind two armchairs: but the chairs’ backs were rather low, and Renée stared at the worn strip of paper.
‘Have you got something to tell me?’ she asked.
  ‘Yes, it’s a long story,’ said Madame Sidonie, folding her arms, like a gourmand about to describe what she had had for dinner. ‘Just think, Monsieur de Saﬀré has fallen in love with the beautiful Madame Saccard. Yes, with you, my dear.’
Renée did not even make a coquettish gesture.
  ‘Really,’ she said. ‘You said he was so taken with Madame Michelin.’
  ‘Oh, that’s all over, completely ﬁnished. I can prove it if you like. Haven’t you heard that the little Michelin woman has managed to catch Baron Gouraud? It’s very strange. Everybody who knows the Baron is amazed. And now, you know, she’s busy getting the Legion of Honour for her husband. Ah, she’s a clever woman. She knows what’s what, you can’t teach her anything!’
  

She said this with a certain regret mingled with admiration.
  ‘But to come back to Monsieur de Saﬀré... He apparently met  you at an actress’s ball, wrapped in a domino, and he says that he asked you to supper. Is it true?’
The young woman was quite surprised.
‘Perfectly true,’ she murmured, ‘but who could have told him?’ ‘And he says he recognized you later on, after you had left the
room, and that he remembered seeing you leave on Maxime’s arm. Since then he’s been madly in love with you. He came to see me, to beg me to give you his apologies.’
‘Well, tell him I forgive him,’ interrupted Renée casually. Then, all her anguish coming back, she continued:
  ‘My dear Sidonie, I’m terribly worried. I absolutely must have  ﬁfty thousand francs by tomorrow morning. This is what I came to talk about. You said you know people who lend money.’
  The businesswoman, oﬀended at the abrupt way in which her sister-in-law had interrupted her, made her wait for an answer.
  ‘Yes,  absolutely,  but I’d advise you to ask your friends ﬁrst. If      I were you, I know what I’d do. I’d go and see Monsieur de Saﬀré.’
Renée gave a forced smile.
  ‘But’, she retorted, ‘that would hardly be proper, considering that he is so much in love.’
  The old woman stared at her; then her ﬂaccid face melted gently into a smile of aﬀectionate pity.
  ‘You poor dear,’ she murmured, ‘I can see you’ve been crying. You must be brave and take life as it comes. Now then, let me arrange this little matter for you.’
  Renée stood up, twisting her ﬁngers, making her gloves crack.  She remained standing, gripped by uncertainty. She opened her mouth, to accept perhaps, when suddenly the bell rang in the next room. Madame Sidonie hurried out, leaving the door ajar, revealing  a double row of pianos. Renée heard a man’s step and the stiﬂed sound of a conversation carried on in an undertone. Mechanically, she walked over to examine more closely the yellow stain the mattresses had left on the wall. The stain disturbed her, made her feel uncomfortable. Forgetting everything, Maxime, the ﬁfty thousand francs, and Monsieur de Saﬀré, she returned to the side of the bed, thinking that it had looked much better where it used to be; some women really had no taste; surely, if you lay in that spot you would
  
have the light in your eyes. Vaguely, in the depths of her memory, she saw the image of the stranger from the Quai Saint-Paul, the romance of her casual aﬀair, indulged in where the bed used to be. The worn wallpaper was all that remained of it. Then the room ﬁlled her with uneasiness, and she became impatient with the murmur of voices from next door.
  When Madame Sidonie returned, opening and closing the door very carefully, she made repeated signs with her ﬁngers to get Renée to speak quietly. Then she whispered in her ear:
‘You have no idea, this is a stroke of luck: it’s Monsieur de Saﬀré.’ ‘You haven’t told him, surely, that I’m here?’ asked Renée
nervously.
  The businesswoman seemed surprised, and answered very innocently:
  ‘I did  indeed.  He’s  waiting  for  me  to  ask  him  in.  Of course, I didn’t mention the ﬁfty thousand francs.’
  Renée, very pale, had drawn herself up as though struck with        a whip. A feeling of inﬁnite pride rose within her. The rough creaking of boots, which she could now hear more distinctly in the next room, exasperated her.
‘I’m going,’ she said curtly. ‘Come and open the door for me.’ Madame Sidonie tried to smile.
  ‘Don’t be silly. I can’t be left with this young man on my hands, now that I’ve told him you’re here. You’re compromising me, really.’
  But Renée was already at the foot of the little staircase. She repeated before the closed shop-door:
‘Open it, open it.’
  The lace-dealer had a habit of putting the brass knob in  her pocket after she had taken it oﬀ the door. She wanted to carry on arguing. At last, becoming angry, her meanness showing in her grey eyes, she cried:
‘But what on earth do you want me to tell him?
  ‘That I’m not for sale,’ replied Renée, with one foot on the pavement.
  She thought she heard Madame Sidonie mutter, as she slammed the door: ‘Get out then, you slut! You’ll pay for this.’
  ‘My God!’ she thought, as she stepped into her brougham, ‘I prefer my husband to this.’
She drove straight home. After dinner she asked Maxime not to


come; she was unwell and needed to rest. The next day, when she handed him the ﬁfteen thousand francs for Sylvia’s jeweller,  she  was embarrassed by his surprise and his questions. Her husband,  she said, had had some good luck. But from that day onwards she became more capricious; she often changed the time of the assignations she gave Maxime, and often even watched for him in the hot-house in order to send him away. He was not troubled much by these changes of mood; he took pleasure in being a plaything in the hands of women. What annoyed him more was the moral turn which their tête-à-têtes sometimes took. She became quite gloomy; she sometimes even had great tears in her eyes. She would leave oﬀ her refrain of ‘le beau jeune homme’ from La Belle Hélène, play the hymns she had learnt at school, and ask her lover if he did not think that sin was always punished sooner or later.
  ‘There’s no doubt she’s growing old,’ he thought. ‘She won’t be any fun to be with in another year or two.’
  The truth was that she was terribly unhappy. She would now have preferred to deceive Maxime with Monsieur de Saﬀré. At Madame Sidonie’s she had reacted badly, she had yielded to instinctive pride, to disgust at the crude bargain she had been oﬀered. But afterwards, when she endured the anguish of adultery, she despised herself so much that she would have given herself to the ﬁrst man who pushed open the door of the room with the pianos. Until then the thought of her husband had sometimes occurred to her, in her incest, like a voluptuous accentuation of horror, but now the reality of the man himself entered into it with a brutality that changed her most delicate feelings into intolerable pain. She, who found pleasure in the reﬁnement of her sin, and dreamt of a superhuman paradise where the gods enjoyed their own kind, was now drifting towards vulgar debauchery, and making herself the common property of two men. She tried in vain to enjoy her infamy. Her lips were still warm with Saccard’s kisses when she oﬀered them to Maxime. Her curiosity explored the depths of these ill-fated pleasures; she went so far as to mingle the two aﬀections, and to seek the son in the embraces of the father. She emerged even more disturbed, bruised from her journey into the unknown regions of sin, from this dark world in which she confused her two lovers, with terrors that seemed to herald the death of all her pleasures.
She kept her tragedy to herself. Her feverish imagination

increased her anguish. She would rather have died than tell Maxime the truth. She was secretly afraid that he might suddenly leave her; above all, she had so absolute a belief in the monstrousness of her sin and the eternity of her damnation, that she would rather have  crossed the Parc Monceau naked than have confessed her shame in a whisper. On the other hand, she still remained the scatterbrain who amazed Paris with her eccentricity. A nervous gaiety seized hold of her, and her mad whims were discussed in the newspapers with her name disguised by initials.
  It was at this time that she seriously wanted to ﬁght a duel, with pistols, with the Duchesse de Sternich, who had deliberately, so she said, spilt a glass of punch over her dress; her brother-in-law, the minister, had to speak ﬁrmly to her before she abandoned the idea. On another occasion she bet Madame de Lauwerens that she would run round the track at Longchamps in less than ten minutes, and it was only a question of costume that deterred her. Maxime began to be frightened by these ﬁts of seeming madness, in which he thought he could hear, at night, on the pillow, all the din of a city obsessed with the pursuit of pleasure.
  One night they went together to the Théâtre-Italien. They had  not even looked at the programme. They wanted to see a great Italian actress, La Ristori, who was at that time the toast of Paris, and who was so much in fashion that they were forced to take an interest in her. The play was Phèdre. He remembered his classical repertory well enough, and she knew enough Italian, to follow the performance. The tragedy even gave them a special emotion, played in this foreign language whose sonorousness seemed to them at times to be a simple orchestral accompaniment to the miming of the actors. Hippolyte was a tall, pale fellow, a very poor actor, who wept through his part.
‘Clumsy oaf!’ muttered Maxime
  But La Ristori, with her broad shoulders shaken by sobs, with her tragic features and big arms, moved Renée profoundly. Phèdre was  of Pasiphaé’s blood, and Renée asked herself of whose blood she could be, she, the incestuous one of modern times. She saw in the play nothing but this tall woman dragging across the stage her antique crime. In the ﬁrst act, when Phèdre conﬁdes her criminal aﬀection to Œnone; in the second, when, burning with passion, she declares herself to Hippolyte; and later, in the fourth act, when the
  

return of Thésée overwhelms her, and she curses herself in a crisis  of dark fury, she ﬁlled the theatre with a cry of such wild passion, with so great a yearning for superhuman voluptuousness, that Renée felt every shudder of her desire  and  remorse  pass  through  her  own body.
  ‘Wait,’ whispered Maxime in her ear, ‘you’ll hear Théramène tell his story. What a sight!’
He muttered in a hollow voice:
Scarce had we issued forth from Troezen’s gates, He on his chariot...
But while the old man spoke, Renée had neither eyes nor ears. The light from the ceiling blinded her, a stiﬂing wave of heat reached her from all the pale faces leaning towards the stage. The monologue continued, interminably. She was back in the hothouse, under the burning foliage, and she dreamt that her husband came in and surprised her in the arms of his son. She was in agony, she was losing consciousness, when the last death-rattle of Phèdre, repenting and dying a convulsive death by poison, made her open her eyes. The curtain fell. Would she have the strength to poison herself one day? How mean and shameful her tragedy was compared with the grand epic of antiquity! While Maxime was fastening her opera-cloak under her chin, she could still hear La Ristori’s rough voice in her ears, and Œnone’s complacent murmur replying.
  In the brougham Maxime did all the talking. He thought tragedy ‘most tedious’ as a rule, and preferred the plays at the Bouﬀes. Nevertheless Phèdre was pretty ‘strong stuﬀ ’. He was interested because... and he squeezed Renée’s hand in explanation. Then a strange idea occurred to him, and he yielded to the impulse to make a joke.
‘I was wise’, he murmured, ‘not to go too near the sea at Trouville.’
  Renée, lost in her melancholy dream, remained silent. He had to repeat himself.
‘Why?’ she asked, not understanding. ‘Because of the monster...’
  He tittered. The joke froze Renée. Everything was becoming distorted in her mind. La Ristori was now a big puppet, pulling up her tunic and sticking out her tongue at the audience like Blanche Muller in the third act of La Belle Hélène; Théramène was dancing
  
a cancan, and Hippolyte was eating bread and jam and stuﬃng his
ﬁngers up his nose.
  When a keener feeling of remorse than usual made Renée shudder, she would react powerfully. What was her crime after all, and why should she blush? Did she not tread on greater infamies every day? Did she not rub shoulders at ministers’ houses, at the Tuileries, everywhere, with wretches like herself, who wore millions on their bodies and were adored on both knees? She thought of the shameful intimacy of Adeline d’Espanet and Suzanne Haﬀner, which drew occasional smiles at the Empress’s Mondays. She recalled the shady dealings of Madame de Lauwerens, whose praises were sung by husbands for her propriety, her orderly conduct, her promptness in paying her bills. She recalled the names of Madame Daste, Madame Teissière, the Baronne de Meinhold, those creatures who let their  lovers pay for their luxuries, and who were quoted in fashionable society as shares are quoted on the Bourse. Madame de Guende was so stupid and yet so beautiful, that she had three high-ranking oﬃcers as lovers at the same time, and was unable to tell one from the other, because of their uniform; which was why that devil Louise said that she ﬁrst made them strip oﬀ so that she could tell which of the three she was talking to. The Comtesse Vanska, for her part, could remember courtyards in which she had sung, pavements on which she had been seen, dressed in calico, prowling along like a she-wolf. Each of these women had her shame, her open, triumphant sore. Finally, dominating them all, the Duchesse de Sternich, old, ugly, worn out, with the halo of a night spent in the Imperial bed; she typiﬁed oﬃcial vice, from which she derived, as it were, a majesty of debauch and a sovereignty over this band of illustrious prostitutes.
  Then the incestuous woman grew accustomed to her sin, as to a gala-dress whose stiﬀness had at ﬁrst bothered her. She followed the fashions, she dressed and undressed as others did. She ended by believing that she lived in a world above common morality, in which the senses became reﬁned and developed, and in which one was allowed to strip naked for the beneﬁt of all Olympus. Sin became a luxury, a ﬂower set in her hair, a diamond fastened on her brow. She remembered, as a form of justiﬁcation and redemption, the Emperor passing by on the general’s arm between the two rows of bowing shoulders.
One man alone, Baptiste, her husband’s valet, continued to disturb


her. Since Saccard had started showing an interest in her, this tall, pale, digniﬁed valet seemed to walk around her with the solemnity of mute disapproval. He never looked at her, his cold glances passed over her head above her chignon, with the modesty of a church beadle refusing to deﬁle his eyes by allowing them to settle on the hair of a sinner. She imagined that he knew everything, and she would have bought his silence had she dared. Then she became very uneasy; she felt a sort of confused respect whenever she met Baptiste, and said to herself that all the respectability of her household had withdrawn and hidden under this lackey’s dress-coat.
One day she asked Céleste:
  ‘Does Baptiste make jokes in the kitchen? Have you ever heard any stories about him? Has he got a mistress?’
‘What a question!’ was all the maid replied. ‘Has he ever made advances to you?’
  ‘He never looks at women. We hardly ever see him. He’s always either with Monsieur or in the stables. He says he’s very fond of horses.’
  Renée was irritated by this apparent respectability. She insisted, for she would have liked to be able to despise her servants. Although she had taken a liking to Céleste, she would have been very pleased to hear that she had lovers.
  ‘But Céleste, don’t you think that Baptiste is rather good-looking?’ ‘Me, Madame!’ cried the maid, with the stupeﬁed air of someone who has just been told something monstrous. ‘Oh! I don’t think about that sort of thing. I don’t want a man. I’ve got my own plans,
as you’ll see. I’m not stupid, believe me.’
  Renée could not get anything further out of her. Her troubles, moreover, increased. Her riotous life, her mad escapades, met with numerous obstacles which she had to overcome, however much she might sometimes be hurt by them. It was thus that one day Louise  de Mareuil rose up between her and Maxime. She was not jealous of ‘the hunchback’, as she scornfully called her; she knew that the doctors had said there was no hope for her, and she could never believe that Maxime would marry such an ugly creature, even for a dowry of a million francs. In her downfall she had retained a bourgeois simplicity with regard to people she loved; though she despised herself, she believed that they possessed superior and admirable qualities. But while rejecting the possibility of a marriage, which
  
would have seemed to her a sinister piece of debauchery and a theft, she felt pained by the familiarity and intimacy of the young couple. When she mentioned Louise to Maxime, he laughed with pleasure and repeated the child’s sayings to her. He told her:
‘She calls me her little man, you know, the silly thing.’
  He was so relaxed about everything that she did not venture to explain to him that this silly thing was seventeen, and that their playfulness with each other, their eagerness, when they met in a drawing room, to ﬁnd a discreet corner where they could make fun of everybody, grieved her and spoilt her most enjoyable evenings.
  An incident occurred which changed the situation decisively. Renée often felt a need for bravado; she had sudden, mad whims. She would drag Maxime behind a curtain or a door, and kiss him at the risk of being seen. One Thursday evening, when the buttercup drawing room was full of people, she had the brilliant idea of calling the young man over to her, as he sat talking with Louise: she walked towards him from the end of the hothouse and suddenly kissed him on the mouth, between two clumps of shrubbery, thinking that no one could see her. But Louise had followed Maxime. When the lovers looked up they saw her, a few steps away, smiling strangely at them, with no blush or sign of surprise, but with the air of a companion in vice, knowing enough to understand and appreciate a kiss of that sort.
  Maxime was really alarmed, while Renée displayed an almost light-hearted indiﬀerence. That put an end to it. It was impossible now for the hunchback to take her lover from her. She thought to herself:
  ‘I should have done it on purpose. She knows now that “her little man” belongs to me.’
  Maxime was reassured to ﬁnd that Louise remained as high-spirited and amusing as before. He declared her to be ‘very smart, a very good sort’. And that was all.
  Renée had reason to be worried. Saccard had for some time been thinking of his son’s marriage with Mademoiselle de Mareuil. There was a dowry of a million there, which he was determined not to let out of his sight, intending later on to appropriate the money for himself. Louise, at the beginning of winter, had stayed in bed for nearly three weeks, and Saccard was so afraid of seeing her die before the projected wedding that he resolved to have the children married
  

forthwith. He did think them a triﬂe young, but then the doctors feared the month of March for the consumptive girl. Monsieur de Mareuil, for his part, was in a delicate position. At the last poll he had ﬁnally succeeded in being returned as a deputy; but the Corps Législatif had just quashed his election, which was the great scandal of the revisions. The election was a mock-heroic aﬀair, and kept the newspapers going for a month. Monsieur Hupel de la Noue, the Prefect of the department, had displayed such vigour that the other candidates had been prevented even from placarding their election addresses or distributing their voting papers. Acting on his advice, Monsieur de Mareuil had ﬁlled the constituency with tables at which the peasants ate and drank for a week. He promised, moreover, a railway line, a new bridge, and three churches, and on the eve of the poll he forwarded to the most inﬂuential electors portraits of the Emperor and Empress, two large engravings covered with glass and set in gilt frames. This gift was an enormous success, and the majority was overwhelming. But when the Chamber, faced with the derisive reaction of the whole of France, found itself compelled to send Monsieur de Mareuil back to his electors, the minister ﬂew  into a terrible rage with the Prefect and the unfortunate candidate, who had really shown themselves to be too ‘hot’. He even spoke     of choosing someone else as the oﬃcial candidate. Monsieur de Mareuil was ﬂabbergasted; he had spent three hundred thousand francs on the department, he owned large estates there, where he was bored to death, and which he would have to sell at a loss. So he came to beg his dear colleague to pacify his brother, and to promise him in his name an absolutely decorous election. It was on this occasion that Saccard again spoke of the children’s marriage, and that the two parents ﬁnally settled the matter.
  When Maxime was sounded out on the subject, he felt embarrassed. Louise amused him, and the dowry tempted him even more. He said yes, and agreed to all the dates that Saccard proposed, so as to avoid an argument. But he admitted to himself that, unfortunately, things would not fall into place so easily. Renée would never agree; she would cry, she would make scenes; she was capable of creating some great scandal that would astound Paris. It was very unpleasant. She frightened him now. She gave him terrible looks, she possessed him so despotically that he thought he could feel claws digging into his shoulder when she laid her white hand on it. Her
  
unruliness turned to roughness, and there was a cracking sound beneath her laughter. He really feared that one night she would go mad in his arms. Remorse, the fear of being surprised, the cruel joys of adultery, did not manifest themselves in her as in other women, through tears and dejection, but in ever greater extravagance. Amid her growing distraction, a rattling sound could be heard, the sound  of a wonderful, bewildering machine beginning to break down.
  Maxime waited patiently for an opportunity to rid himself of this irksome mistress. He repeated once more that they had been foolish. Though their domestic closeness had at ﬁrst lent an additional voluptuousness to their aﬀair, it now prevented him from breaking it oﬀ, as he would have done with any other woman. He would have stayed away; that was his way of ending his aﬀairs, so as to avoid all eﬀort or argument. But he felt powerless, and he still even willingly forgot himself in Renée’s embraces: she was motherly, she paid for him, she was ready to get him out of trouble whenever a creditor lost patience. Then the thought of Louise came back, the thought of the dowry of a million francs, and it made him reﬂect, even amid Renée’s kisses, that ‘this was all very well, but it was not serious and must come to an end some time’.
  One night Maxime was so rapidly cleaned out at the house of       a lady where cards were often played till dawn, that he had one of those ﬁts of dumb anger common to the gambler whose pockets have been emptied. He would have given anything to be able to ﬂing a few more louis on the table. He picked up his hat and, with the mechanical step of a man driven by an obsession, went to the Parc Monceau, opened the little gate, and found himself in the hothouse. It was past midnight. Renée had told him not to come that night. When she closed her door to him now, she no longer even invented an excuse, and he thought only of making the most of his time oﬀ. He did not remember Renée’s injunction until he had reached the glass door of the little drawing room, which was closed. As a rule, when he was expected, Renée undid the latch beforehand.
  ‘Damn it!’ he thought, seeing a light in the dressing room window. ‘I’ll whistle and she’ll come down. I won’t disturb her, and if she has a few louis I’ll leave at once.’
  He whistled softly. He often used this signal to announce his arrival. But this evening he whistled several times in vain. He grew impatient, whistled more loudly, not wanting to abandon his idea of
  

an immediate loan. At last he saw the glass door opened with inﬁnite precaution, though he had heard no sound of footsteps. Renée appeared in the twilight of the hothouse, her hair undone, scantily clad, as if she were just going to bed. Her feet were bare. She pushed him towards one of the arbours, descending the steps and treading  on the gravel of the pathways without seeming to feel the cold or the roughness of the ground.
  ‘You shouldn’t whistle so loud,’ she murmured with repressed anger. ‘I told you not to come. What do you want?’
  ‘Let’s go up,’ said Maxime, surprised at this reception. ‘I’ll tell you upstairs. You’ll catch cold.’
  But as he stepped forward she held him back, and he noticed that she was terribly pale. She was gripped by a silent terror. Her petticoats, the lace of her underclothes, hung like tragic shreds on her trembling skin.
He looked at her with growing surprise. ‘What’s the matter? Are you ill?’
  He looked up instinctively and glanced through the glass panes   of the hothouse at the dressing room where he had seen a light.
‘There’s a man in your apartment!’ he said suddenly. ‘No there isn’t,’ she stammered, becoming distraught. ‘Nonsense, I can see his shadow.’
  Then for a minute they stood there, looking at each other, not knowing what to say. Renée’s teeth chattered with terror, and it seemed to her as if buckets of ice-cold water were being emptied over her feet. Maxime felt angrier than he might have imagined; but he remained self-possessed enough to collect his thoughts, and to say to himself that he now had a good opportunity to break oﬀ the whole relationship.
  ‘You’re not going to tell me that Céleste wears a man’s overcoat,’ he continued. ‘If the panes of the hothouse weren’t so thick, I might recognize the gentleman.’
  She pushed him further into the gloom of the foliage and said, with clasped hands:
‘Please, Maxime...’
  But the young man’s mischievousness was aroused, a ﬁerce sense of mischief that now sought vengeance. He was too puny to ﬁnd relief in anger. His lips were compressed in spite; and instead of striking her, as he had at ﬁrst felt inclined to do, he rejoined sharply:
  
   ‘You should have told me, I wouldn’t have come to disturb you. It’s becoming clearer every day that we don’t care for each other any more. I was getting fed up with it myself... Don’t worry, I’ll let you go up again; but not until you’ve told me the gentleman’s name.’
‘Never, never!’ murmured Renée, forcing back her tears.
  ‘It’s not to challenge him to a duel, I just want to know. His name, tell me his name quickly, and I’ll go.’
  He was holding her by the wrists, and looked her in the eyes, laughing. She struggled, distraught, refusing to open her lips for fear that she would let slip the name he wanted.
  ‘We’ll make a noise soon, then you’ll be in trouble. What are you afraid of? We’re good friends, aren’t we? I want to know who my successor is, that’s fair enough surely. Let me help. It’s Monsieur de Mussy –– you’ve been touched by his distress?’
She did not reply, but bowed her head before this interrogation. ‘Not Monsieur de Mussy? The Duc de Rozan, then? Not him
either? The Comte de Chibray perhaps? Not even him?’ He stopped and reﬂected further.
  ‘Well, damn it, I can’t think of anybody else. It’s not my father, after what you told me?’
  Renée gave a start as if she had been scalded, and said in a ﬂat tone:
  ‘No, you know he doesn’t come any more. I wouldn’t allow it, it would be too degrading.’
‘Then who is it?’
  He tightened his grip on her wrists. She struggled a few moments longer.
‘Oh, Maxime, if you knew! But I can’t tell you.’
  Then, overcome, crushed, looking up in fright at the window, she stammered:
‘It’s Monsieur de Saﬀré.’
  Maxime, who had taken delight in his cruel game, became extremely pale at this admission, which he had sought so persistently. He was vexed at the unexpected pain this man’s name caused him. Roughly he released Renée’s wrists, drew even closer to her, and said, full in her face, between clenched teeth:
‘You know what you are, you’re a...!’
  He said the word. He was walking away when she ran to him, sobbing, and took him in her arms murmuring words of love and
  

appeals for forgiveness, and swore that she still adored him and would explain everything the next day.  But he pushed her away,   and slamming the door of the hothouse, replied:
‘No, no, no! It’s over. I’ve had quite enough.’
  She was devastated. She watched him go through the  garden. The trees in the hothouse seemed to be revolving round her. Then she dragged her bare feet over the gravel of the pathways, climbed the steps, her skin mottled with cold, appearing even more tragic in the disorder of her ﬂimsy clothes. Upstairs she said, in reply to her husband’s questions, that she thought she had remembered where a little notebook had got to that she had mislaid that morning. When she was in bed, she suddenly felt inﬁnite despair when she thought that she ought to have told Maxime that his father had arrived home with her, and had followed her into her room to discuss some money matters.
  The next day Saccard resolved to bring the Charonne business to  a head. His wife belonged to him; he had just felt her, soft and inert in his hands, like a helpless plaything. On the other hand the precise plan for the Boulevard du Prince-Eugène was about to be settled, and it was necessary that Renée should be relieved of the land before the news broke of the imminent expropriation. Saccard put an artist’s love of his work into this piece of business; he carefully watched his plan ripen, and set his traps with the subtlety of a hunter who prides himself on the skill with which he catches his prey. In his case it was simply the self-satisfaction of an expert gamester, of a man who derives peculiar pleasure from ill-gotten gains; he wanted to buy the land for a song, and was quite ready to give his wife a hundred thousand francs’-worth of jewellery in celebration of his triumph. The simplest operations became complicated as soon as he touched them, and turned into dramas: he became quite impassioned, he would have fought with his father for a ﬁve-franc piece, and afterwards he scattered his gold like a king.
  Before obtaining from Renée the transfer of her share of the property, he had the foresight to go and sound out Larsonneau as to the blackmailing intentions of which he suspected him. His intuition saved him in this instance. The expropriation agent had  thought that the fruit was now ripe for the picking. When Saccard walked into the oﬃce in the Rue de Rivoli, he found his associate in a state of despair.
  
   ‘My friend,’ murmured the latter, wringing his hands and trying  to force out a sob, ‘we’re lost. I was just coming to see you to discuss the best way out of this terrible business.’
  Saccard noticed that Larsonneau had been signing letters,  and that the signatures were admirably ﬁrm. He looked at him calmly, and said:
‘What’s happened, then?’
  Larsonneau did not reply immediately; he threw himself into his armchair in front of his writing-table, and there, with his elbows on his blotting-pad and his forehead between his hands, furiously shook his head. At last, in a strangled tone, he said:
‘The ledger has been stolen.’
  He proceeded to relate how one of his clerks, a rogue who should be in jail, had absconded with a large number of documents, among which was the famous ledger. The worst of it was that the thief had realized to what use he could put the ledger, and would only sell it back for a hundred thousand francs.
  Saccard reﬂected. The story struck him as altogether too clumsy. Obviously Larsonneau did not really care whether he believed him or not. He simply wanted a pretext for giving him to understand that he wanted a hundred thousand francs out of the Charonne aﬀair, and that on this condition he would restore the compromising papers in his possession. The bargain seemed too dear to Saccard. He would not have minded allowing his ex-colleague a share; but this ambush, this vain attempt at deception, irritated him. On the other hand he remained apprehensive; he knew Larsonneau, and he knew him to be quite capable of giving the documents to his brother the minister, who would certainly pay him to prevent any scandal.
‘The bastard!’ he muttered, sitting down, ‘that’s very unfortunate.
Could I see this dreadful character?’
  ‘I’ll send for him,’ said Larsonneau. ‘He lives close by, in the Rue Jean-Lantier.’
  Not ten minutes later a short young man with a squint, fair hair, and a freckled face slipped in, taking care that the door should not make a noise. He was dressed in a badly cut black frock coat, that was too big for him and horribly threadbare. He stood at a respectful distance, watching Saccard out of the corner of his eye. Larsonneau, addressing him as Baptistin, submitted him to a series of questions, to which he replied in monosyllables without being in the least
  

disconcerted; and he received with complete indiﬀerence the epithets of thief, swindler, and scoundrel with which his employer thought ﬁt to accompany each of his questions.
  Saccard admired the wretch’s coolness. At one moment the expropriation agent ﬂew from his chair as if to strike him; and he simply took a step backwards, squinting with greater humility.
  ‘That will do, leave him alone,’ said the ﬁnancier. ‘So, Monsieur, you want a hundred thousand francs for those papers?’
‘Yes, a hundred thousand francs,’ replied the young man, and left. Larsonneau seemed unable to contain himself.
  ‘Ugh! What a reptile!’, he stammered. ‘Did you see his deceitful looks? Those fellows look timid enough, but they’d murder a man for twenty francs.’
Saccard interrupted him and said:
  ‘Bah! He’s nothing to be afraid of. I think we’ll be able to come  to terms with him. I came to see you about a much more distressing matter. You were right to mistrust my wife, my dear friend. Would you believe that she wants to sell her share in the property to Monsieur Haﬀner. She needs money, she says. Her friend Suzanne must have encouraged her.’
  Larsonneau ceased his lamentations abruptly; he listened, rather pale, adjusting his stand-up collar which had become bent during his show of anger.
  ‘The  transfer’,  continued  Saccard,  ‘would  destroy  our  plan.   If Monsieur Haﬀner becomes your co-partner, not only will our proﬁts be lost, but I’m afraid we shall ﬁnd ourselves in a very sticky position in relation to that very meticulous person, who will insist on examining the accounts.’
  The expropriation agent began to pace up and down in an agitated way, his patent-leather boots creaking on the carpet.
  ‘You see,’ he muttered, ‘the position one puts oneself in to oblige people! But, my dear fellow, in your place, I would certainly stop my wife from doing anything so foolish. I’d rather beat her.’
  ‘Ah, my dear friend!’ said the ﬁnancier, with a cunning smile, ‘I have no more power over my wife than you seem to have over that scoundrel Baptistin.’
  Larsonneau stopped short before Saccard, who went on smiling, and gave him a piercing look. Then he started to pace up and down again, but with a slow, measured step. He went up to a mirror,
  
adjusted his tie, and walked on again, regaining his elegant manner. Suddenly he shouted:
‘Baptistin!’
  The young man came back in, but through another door. He was no longer wearing a hat, but was twisting a pen between his ﬁngers.
‘Go and fetch the ledger,’ said Larsonneau.
  When the clerk had left, he discussed the amount they should   give him.
‘Do me this favour,’ he ended by saying, quite bluntly.
  Saccard agreed to give him thirty thousand francs out of the future proﬁts of the Charonne enterprise. He thought he had escaped cheaply from the usurer’s gloved hands. The latter had Saccard’s undertaking made out in his name, keeping up the pretence to the end, saying that he would account for the thirty thousand francs to the young man. With a laugh of relief Saccard burnt the ledger in the ﬁre, page by page. Then, this operation over, he shook Larsonneau’s hand vigorously and took his leave, saying:
  ‘You’re going to Laure’s tonight, aren’t you? Look out for me.     I will have settled everything with my wife; we’ll make our ﬁnal  arrangements.’
  Laure d’Aurigny, who often changed her address, was at that time living in a big apartment on the Boulevard Haussmann, opposite the Chapelle Expiatoire. She had taken to having a reception day every week, like the ladies in real society. It enabled her to bring together at the same time all the men who saw her separately during the week. Aristide Saccard exulted in these Tuesday evenings: he was the oﬃcial lover; and he looked the other way, with a vague laugh, whenever the mistress of the house deceived him in the doorways by granting an assignation the same night to one of these gentlemen. He stayed till all the rest had gone, lit another cigar, talked business, joked for a moment about the gentleman who was getting extremely bored in the street while waiting for him to go, and then, after calling Laure ‘his dear child’ and giving her a little pat on the cheek, quietly left through one door while the gentleman came in through another. The secret alliance, which had consolidated Saccard’s credit and provided Laure with two sets of furniture in one month, continued  to amuse them. But Laure wanted a dénouement to this comedy.  This dénouement, arranged in advance, was to consist in a public breaking oﬀ, in favour of some idiot who would pay a very high price
  

for the right to become the oﬃcial lover and to be known as such to all Paris. The idiot was soon found. The Duc de Rozan, tired of wearying to no purpose the women of his own set, dreamt of acquiring the reputation of a debauchee, in order to give some colour to his insipid personality. He was an assiduous visitor at Laure’s Tuesdays, and had conquered her by his absolute innocence. Unfortunately, although he was thirty-ﬁve, he was still dependent on his mother, so much so that the most he could dispose of was some ten louis at a time. On the evenings when Laure deigned to take his ten louis, complaining about her poverty, and the hundred thousand francs she needed, he sighed and promised to give it to her on the day he became independent. Thereupon she had the bright idea of making him friends with Larsonneau, who was one of her regular visitors. The two men breakfasted together at Tortoni’s; and over dessert Larsonneau, describing his love aﬀair with a delicious Spaniard, professed to know some moneylenders; but he strongly advised Rozan never to fall into their clutches. This disclosure excited the duke, who succeeded in extracting a promise from his good friend that he would take care of ‘his little aﬀair’. He took so keen an interest in it that he was to bring the money on the very evening when Saccard had arranged to meet him at Laure’s.
  When Larsonneau entered Laure’s great white-and-gold drawing room, only ﬁve or six women had arrived: they seized his hands and put their arms round his neck with a great display of aﬀection. They called him ‘big Lar!’, an aﬀectionate diminutive invented by Laure. He replied, in a piping voice:
‘There, there, my little darlings; you’ll squash my hat.’
  They calmed down, and gathered round him on a couch, while    he told them about a stomach-ache of Sylvia’s, with whom he had supped the night before. Then, taking a bag of sweets from his coat pocket, he handed out some burnt almonds. But Laure came  in from her bedroom, and as several gentlemen were arriving, she drew Larsonneau into a boudoir at one end of the drawing room, from which it was separated by a double set of hangings.
‘Have you got the money?’ she asked, when they were alone.
  She addressed him as tu on important occasions. Larsonneau made no reply, but bowed in a funny way and tapped the inside pocket of his coat.
‘Oh, that big Lar!’ murmured the young woman, delighted.

She seized him round the waist and kissed him.
  ‘Wait,’ she said, ‘I want the curl-papers straight away. Rozan is in my room, I’ll go and fetch him.’
  But he held her back, and kissing her on the shoulders in his turn, said:
‘You remember what I asked you to do?’ ‘Yes, of course, you silly thing.’
  She returned with Rozan. Larsonneau was dressed more smartly than the duke, with better-ﬁtting gloves and a more artistic cravat. They shook hands casually, and talked about the races of two days before, when one of their friends had run a loser. Laure grew impatient.
  ‘Never mind all that, my dear,’ she said to Rozan, ‘that big Lar has got the money, you know. We had better settle up.’
Larsonneau pretended to remember.
  ‘Ah, yes, that’s true,’ he said. ‘I’ve got the money. But you would have been well advised to listen to me, old chap! To think that those rogues asked me for ﬁfty per cent. But I agreed, because you told me it didn’t matter.’
  Laure d’Aurigny had managed to ﬁnd some bill-stamps during  the day. But when it became a question of pen and ink, she looked at the two men in consternation, doubting whether she had such things in the house. She proposed to go and look in the kitchen, when Larsonneau took from his pocket –– the same pocket that held the bag of sweets –– two marvellous objects: a silver penholder that screwed out, and an inkstand in steel and ebony, ﬁnished as delicately as a trinket. As Rozan sat down, he said:
  ‘Make the notes out to me,’ he said. ‘You understand, I didn’t want to compromise you. We’ll settle it between ourselves. Six bills of twenty-ﬁve thousand francs each, I think?’
  Laure counted the ‘curl-papers’ at one end of the table. Rozan did not even see them. When he had signed, and looked up, they had disappeared into the woman’s pocket. But she came up to him and kissed him on both cheeks, to his evident delight. Larsonneau watched them philosophically as he folded the bills, and put the inkstand and penholder back in his pocket.
  Laure still had her arms round Rozan’s neck when Aristide Saccard lifted a corner of the door-hangings.
‘It’s all right, don’t mind me,’ he said, laughing.


The duke blushed. But Laure went and shook hands with the
ﬁnancier, exchanging a knowing wink with him. She was radiant. ‘It’s taken care of, my dear,’ she said. ‘I warned you. You’re not too
angry with me, are you?’
  Saccard shrugged good-naturedly. He pulled back the hangings, and standing aside to let Laure and the duke pass, he barked out like a gentleman-usher:
‘Monsieur the duke, Madame the duchess!’
  The joke was tremendously successful. The newspapers printed   it the next day, giving Laure d’Aurigny’s real name, and describing the two men by very transparent initials. The break between Aristide Saccard and fat Laure caused an even greater stir than their purported love-aﬀair.
  In the meantime Saccard had let the curtain fall on the burst of merriment which his joke had occasioned in the drawing room.
  ‘What a splendid girl!’ he said, turning towards Larsonneau. ‘And you’re the one, you old crook, who should get the most out of this. How much is it again?’
  ‘Larsonneau protested, smiling, and he pulled down his shirt-cuﬀs, which were working up. At last he came and sat down near the door, on a couch to which Saccard beckoned him.
  ‘Come over here, I don’t want to hear your confession, for God’s sake...!’ said Saccard. ‘Let’s get down to some serious business.         I had a long conversation with my wife this evening. It’s all arranged.’
‘So she has agreed to transfer her share?’ asked Larsonneau.
  ‘Yes, but it wasn’t easy. Women are so stubborn! You know my wife had promised an old aunt of hers not to sell. She had the most terrible scruples. Fortunately I had a marvellous story ready.’
  He rose to light a cigar with the candle Laure had left on the table, came back, and stretched out on the couch.
  ‘I told my wife,’ he continued, ‘that you were completely ruined, that you had gambled on the Bourse, squandered your money on women, and got involved in stupid speculative ventures: in short, that you’re on the brink of complete bankruptcy. I even gave her to understand that I didn’t think you were completely honest. Then I explained that the Charonne aﬀair would be swallowed up in your personal disasters, and that the best thing would be for her to accept your proposal to release her and buy her out for a song.’
  
   ‘I don’t call that clever,’ muttered the expropriation agent. ‘Do you think your wife will believe all that nonsense?’
Saccard smiled. He was in one of his expansive moods.
  ‘You’re so naive, my dear fellow!’ he resumed. ‘What has the plot of the story got to do with it? It’s the details, the gesture and the accent, that matter. Call Rozan over; I bet I can persuade him it’s broad daylight. My wife is no smarter than Rozan. I gave her a glimpse of the abyss. She has no suspicion of the expropriation. She said she was surprised that in the middle of a catastrophe you could think of taking on an even bigger challenge, so I told her that she no doubt stood in the way of some dirty trick you were planning to play on your creditors. In the end I advised her to agree, because it was the only way not to get mixed up in endless lawsuits and to derive some money from her property.’
  Larsonneau still thought the story rather clumsy. His own method was less melodramatic: each of his transactions was put together and unravelled with the elegance of a drawing room comedy.
  ‘Personally, I would have thought of something else,’ he said. ‘But everyone has his own system. So all we have to do now is pay up.’
  ‘That’, replied Saccard, ‘is what I want to talk to you about. Tomorrow I’ll take the deed to my wife, and she will only have to send it to you to receive the stipulated price. I prefer not to have a formal meeting.’
  As a matter of fact he had never allowed Larsonneau to visit them socially. He never invited him to the house, and he went with him to see Renée whenever it was absolutely necessary for the two partners to meet; that had happened three times. He nearly always acted with a power of attorney from his wife, seeing no point in letting her know too much about his aﬀairs.
He opened his wallet, and added:
  ‘Here are the two hundred thousand francs’ worth of bills accepted by my wife; you must give her those in payment, and add one hundred thousand francs, which I’ll bring tomorrow morning. I’m ruining myself, my dear friend. This business will cost me a fortune.’ ‘But that’, observed the expropriation agent, ‘will only make three hundred thousand francs. Will the receipt be made out for that
amount?’
  ‘A receipt for three hundred thousand francs!’ rejoined Saccard, laughing. ‘I should think so! We’d be in a ﬁx later on if it isn’t.
  

According to our inventories, the property must be worth two-and-a-half million francs by now. The receipt will be for half that, of course.’
‘Your wife will never sign it.’
  ‘Yes, she will. I tell you it’s all right. I told her it was your ﬁrst condition. You’re holding a pistol to our heads, don’t you see, with your bankruptcy. That’s where I pretended to doubt your honesty and accused you of wanting to cheat your creditors. Do you think my wife understands a word of all that?’
Larsonneau shook his head and murmured:
  ‘It doesn’t matter, but you ought to have thought of something simpler.’
  ‘But my story is extremely simple!’ said Saccard, most surprised. ‘What’s so complicated about it?’
  He was quite unaware of the incredible number of threads with which he interwove the most ordinary piece of business. He derived real joy from the cock-and-bull story he had just told Renée; and what delighted him most was the impudence of the lie, the sheer number of impossibilities, the astonishing complication of the plot. He could have had the land long since had he not constructed all this drama; but he would have found less enjoyment in obtaining it easily. He set to work on creating a whole ﬁnancial melodrama out of the Charonne aﬀair.
  He stood up, and taking Larsonneau by the arm, walked towards the drawing room.
  ‘You understand, don’t you? Just do as I say, and later on you’ll applaud me. You know, my dear fellow, you shouldn’t wear yellow gloves, they spoil the look of your hands.’
The expropriation agent just smiled and murmured:
  ‘Oh, gloves have their advantages: you can touch anything without getting dirty.’
  As they entered the drawing room, Saccard was surprised and somewhat alarmed to ﬁnd Maxime on the other side of the hangings. He was sitting on a couch next to a blonde lady who was telling  him, in a monotonous voice, a long story –– her own life-story no doubt. He had, in fact, overheard his father’s conversation with Larsonneau. The two accomplices seemed to him a pair of old rogues. Still annoyed by Renée’s betrayal, he felt a cowardly pleasure in learning of the theft of which she was to be the victim. It avenged
  
him a little. His father came and shook hands with him, looking suspicious, but Maxime whispered, motioning to the blonde lady:
‘She’s not bad, is she? I’m going to keep her for the night.’
  Then Saccard began to posture and become ﬂirtatious. Laure d’Aurigny joined them for a moment; she complained that Maxime barely called on her once a month. He claimed to have been very busy, which made everyone laugh. He added that in future they would see him constantly.
  ‘I’ve been writing a tragedy,’ he said, ‘and I only hit on the ﬁfth act yesterday. I now want to relax with all the pretty women in Paris.’
  He laughed. He relished his allusions, which only he could understand. There was no one left in the drawing  room  now  except Rozan and Larsonneau, at either side of the ﬁreplace. The Saccards rose to go, as did the blonde lady, who lived in the same building. Then Laure went and said something to the duke in  hushed tones. He seemed surprised and annoyed. Seeing that he could not make up his mind to get up from his armchair, she said in an undertone:
‘No, really, not tonight. I’ve got a headache! Tomorrow, I promise.’
  Rozan had no choice but to obey. Laure waited until he was on the landing, and then said quickly in Larsonneau’s ear:
‘You see, big Lar? I keep my word. Stuﬀ him into his carriage.’
  When the blonde lady took leave of the gentlemen to go up to her apartment, which was on the ﬂoor above, Saccard was surprised not to see Maxime follow her.
‘Well?’ he asked.
‘Well, no,’ replied the young man. ‘I’ve thought better of it.’ Then he had an idea that struck him as very funny:
  ‘You can take my place if you like. Hurry up, she hasn’t shut her door yet.’
But the father shrugged, and said:
‘Thanks, but I’ve had a better oﬀer.’
  The four men went downstairs. Outside the duke insisted on giving Larsonneau a lift; his mother lived in the Marais, and he could drop the expropriation agent at his door in the Rue de Rivoli. The latter refused, closed the coach door himself, and told the coachman to drive on. He stood talking on the pavement of the Boulevard Haussmann with the two others, showing no sign of moving on.
‘Ah! Poor Rozan!’ said Saccard, who suddenly understood.


  Larsonneau swore that it was not so, that he had no interest in  that, that he only cared about business aﬀairs. As the two others continued to chat, and it was extremely cold, he exclaimed:
  ‘I don’t care, I’m going to ring. You’re absolute busybodies, Messieurs.’
‘Goodnight!’ cried Maxime, as the door closed.
  Taking his father by the arm, he walked up the boulevard with him. It was one of those clear, frosty nights when it is so pleasant to walk on the hard ground in the icy air. Saccard said that Larsonneau was wrong, that he should simply be Laure’s friend; and he proceeded to declare that the love of those women was really a bad thing. He assumed quite a moral air, uttering maxims and precepts of remarkable propriety.
  ‘You see,’ he told his son, ‘that only lasts for a while, my boy. It’s not good for your health, and it doesn’t give you real happiness. You know I’m not a Puritan. But I’ve had enough of it; I’m going to settle down.’
  Maxime chuckled; he stopped his father, looked at him in the moonlight, and told him he was ‘a decent sort’. But Saccard became even more serious:
  ‘You can joke as much as you like. I tell you there’s nothing like marriage to keep a man healthy and happy.’
  Then he talked about Louise. He walked more slowly, to ﬁnish the business, he said, since they were on the subject. Everything was arranged. He even told him that he and Monsieur de Mareuil had ﬁxed the date for signing the contract for the Sunday following the Thursday in mid-Lent. On that Thursday there would be a great party at the house in the Parc Monceau, and he would take the opportunity to make a public announcement of the marriage. Maxime thought all this very satisfactory. He was rid of Renée, he saw no further obstacle, he surrendered to his father as he had surrendered  to his stepmother.
  ‘Well then, that’s settled,’ he said. ‘But don’t talk about it to Renée. Her friends would tease me, and I’d prefer her to know about it at the same time as everybody else.’
  Saccard promised to say nothing. Then, as they reached the top of the Boulevard Malesherbes, he again made free with his advice. He told him how he ought to behave to make his home a paradise.
‘Above all, never break oﬀ with your wife. It’s folly. It costs you a

fortune. In the ﬁrst place, you have to keep a woman, don’t you? And household expenses are much greater: there are dresses, madame’s private amusements, her close friends, the Devil and all his retinue.’ He was in an extremely generous mood. The success of the
Charonne business had made him quite sentimental.
  ‘As for me,’ he continued, ‘I was born to live in happy obscurity in some village, with my family around me.  People don’t know   me, my boy. I give the impression of being very frivolous. Well, that’s a mistake. I’d love to be  near  my  wife,  I’d  willingly  exchange my business for a modest income that would allow me to retire to Plassans. You’re going to be rich: make a home with Louise in which you’ll live like two turtle-doves. It’s so pleasant! I’ll come and visit you. It’ll do me good.’
  He ended almost with a sob. By now they had reached the front gate of the house, and stood talking on the kerbstone. A north wind was sweeping over the roofs of Paris. The pale night, white with frost, was completely silent. Maxime, surprised at his father’s show of emotion, had had a question on his lips for the past minute.
‘But,’ he said at last, ‘I thought...’ ‘What?’
‘Well, with your wife!’ Saccard shrugged.
  ‘Yes, just so! I was a fool. That’s why I can say these things from experience. But we’re together again, completely! It’s almost six weeks now. I see her at night when I don’t get home too late. Tonight the poor little dear will have to do without me; I’ve got to work until dawn. She has a marvellous ﬁgure!’
  As Maxime held out his hand, he added, in a conﬁdential whisper: ‘You know Blanche Muller’s ﬁgure; well, it’s like that, only ten times softer. And her hips! They have such a beautiful shape, such
elegance!’
He concluded by saying to the young man as he was going: ‘You’re like me, you have a good heart, you’ll make your wife
happy. Goodnight, my boy!’
  When Maxime ﬁnally escaped from his father, he  walked  quickly around the gardens. What he had just heard surprised him   so much that he felt an irresistible desire to see Renée. He wanted   to beg forgiveness for his brutality, to know why she had told him that lie about Monsieur de Saﬀré, and to learn the story of her
  

husband’s aﬀection. But he felt all this confusedly; his one clear wish was to smoke a cigar in her apartment and resume their  friendly relations. If she was in the right mood, he would even tell her about his marriage, to make her see that their aﬀair  must  remain dead and buried. When he had opened the little gate, of which he had fortunately kept the key, he managed to convince himself that his visit, after his father’s revelations, was necessary and absolutely proper.
  In the hothouse he whistled as he had done the evening before; but he was not kept waiting. Renée came and unfastened the glass door of the little drawing room, and led the way upstairs without a word. She had that instant come back from a ball at the Hôtel de Ville. She still wore her dress of white puﬀed tulle, covered with satin bows; the skirts of the satin bodice were edged with a wide border of white bugles, which the light of the candles tinged with blue and pink. Upstairs, when Maxime looked at her, he was touched by her pallor and the profound emotion that prevented her from speaking. She had obviously not expected him, and was still quivering all over at seeing him arrive quite nonchalantly as usual. Céleste came in from the dressing room, where she had been to fetch a nightdress, and the lovers remained silent, waiting for the girl to go. As a rule they did not mind what they said in front of her; but they felt ashamed of the things that were on their lips. Renée told Céleste to help her to undress in the bedroom, where there was a big ﬁre. The maidservant removed the pins and slowly took oﬀ each article of ﬁnery. Maxime, bored, mechanically picked up the nightdress,  which was lying on a chair beside him, and warmed it before the ﬁre, leaning forward with arms outstretched. In happier times he used to do this little service for Renée. She felt touched when she saw him daintily holding the nightdress in front of the ﬁre. Then, as Céleste had not yet ﬁnished, he asked:
‘Did you enjoy yourself at the ball?’
  ‘Oh no, it’s always the same, you know,’ she replied. ‘Far too many people, a great crush.’
  He turned the nightdress round, for it was already warm on one side.
‘What did Adeline wear?’
  ‘Mauve, a badly thought-out dress. She’s short, and yet she’s obsessed with ﬂounces.’
  
  They talked about the other women. Maxime was now burning  his ﬁngers with the nightdress.
  ‘You’ll scorch it,’ said Renée, whose voice sounded quite maternal. Céleste took the nightdress from the young man’s hands. He stood up and went over to the great pink-and-grey bed, examining one of the embroidered bouquets on the curtains so as to avert his eyes from the sight of Renée’s bare breasts. He did this instinctively. Since he no longer considered himself her lover, he felt he no longer had the right to look. Then he took a cigar from his pocket and lit it. Renée had given him permission to smoke in her room. At last Céleste withdrew, leaving the young woman by the ﬁreside, all white in her
nightdress.
  Maxime paced up and down for a few more moments without speaking, glancing at Renée, who seemed to be shaking again. Stationing himself before the ﬁre, his cigar between his teeth, he asked abruptly:
  ‘Why didn’t you tell me it was my father who was with you last night?’
  She looked up, her eyes wide open, with a look of supreme anguish; then she blushed violently and, overcome with shame, hid her face in her hands, stammering:
‘You know? You know?’
She recovered, and tried to lie. ‘It’s not true. Who told you?’ Maxime shrugged.
  ‘My father. He thinks you’ve got a marvellous ﬁgure and talked about your hips.’
  He had allowed a certain annoyance to show through. But he began pacing about again, and continued in a scolding but friendly voice between two puﬀs at his cigar:
  ‘I really can’t understand you. You’re a strange woman. It was your fault if I behaved like a brute yesterday. You ought to have told me it was my father, and I would have left without a fuss. What right have I got? But you go and tell me it’s Monsieur de Saﬀré!’
  She was sobbing, her hands over her face. He went up to her, knelt down, and forced her hands apart.
‘Tell me why you said it was Monsieur de Saﬀré!’ Then, still looking away, she replied through her tears:
‘I thought you’d leave me if you knew that your father...’


  He stood up, picked up his cigar, which he had placed on the mantelpiece, and contented himself with muttering:
‘You’re a very funny woman, you really are!’
  She had stopped crying. The ﬂames in the grate and the ﬁre in her cheeks had dried her tears. Her surprise at seeing Maxime so unperturbed by a revelation that she thought would destroy him made her forget her shame. She watched him pacing up and down, and listened to his voice as if she were dreaming. Without abandoning his cigar, he repeated that she was absurd, that it was quite natural that she should sleep with her husband, that he could hardly resent it. But to confess that she had a lover when it wasn’t true! He kept returning to this point, which he could not understand and which he looked upon as positively monstrous, talking of women’s ‘foolish fancies’.
‘You’re not quite right in the head, my dear; you must be careful.’ He ﬁnally asked inquisitively:
‘But why Monsieur de Saﬀré in particular?’ ‘He’s always paying court to me,’ said Renée.
  Maxime refrained from being impertinent; he was on the point of saying that she was no doubt only anticipating things by a month  when she confessed that Monsieur de Saﬀré was her lover. He smiled wickedly at this spiteful idea, and tossing his cigar into the ﬁre, sat down on the opposite side of the ﬁreplace. There he talked common sense, giving Renée to understand that they must remain good friends. Her stare embarrassed him, but he did not have the courage to tell her of his forthcoming marriage. She gazed at him, her eyes still swollen with tears. She thought him a poor creature,  narrow-minded and contemptible, and yet she loved him, as she might love her lace. He looked handsome in the light of the candelabra on the mantelpiece, next to him. As he threw back his head, the light of the candles tinged his hair with gold and glided over the soft down on his cheeks, creating a charming eﬀect.
‘I really must go,’ he said several times.
  He was determined not to stay. Besides, Renée would not have let him. They both thought so and said so; they were now just good friends. When Maxime at last squeezed Renée’s hand and was about to leave, she held him back a moment longer and spoke to him about his father, praising him to the skies.
‘You see, I felt too much remorse. It’s good that this has happened.

You don’t know your father; I was surprised that he was so kind, so disinterested. The poor man has so much to worry about.’
  Maxime examined the tips of his boots without replying, with an air of uneasiness. She persisted:
  ‘As long as he didn’t come here, I didn’t care. But when I saw him here, so aﬀectionate, bringing me money he must have scraped together all over the city, ruining himself for me, I became ill just thinking about it. If you knew how he has looked after me!’
  The young man returned to the ﬁreplace, and leant against the mantelpiece. He stood there embarrassed, his head bowed, a smile forming slowly on his lips.
  ‘Yes,’ he muttered, ‘that’s my father’s strong point, looking after other people’s interests.’
  Renée was surprised at his tone. She looked at him and he, as if to defend himself, added:
  ‘Oh, I don’t know anything. I’m just saying that my father is very clever.’
  ‘You’d be wrong to speak ill of him,’ she replied. ‘You’re obviously too quick to judge him. If I told you all his troubles, if I repeated what he said this evening, you’d see how wrong people are when they think all he cares about is money.’
Maxime interrupted his stepmother with an ironical laugh. ‘Believe me, I know him, I know him well. He must have told you
some ﬁne stories. Tell me what he said.’
  This bantering tone oﬀended her. She increased her praises, she talked of the Charonne aﬀair, of the swindle of which she had understood nothing, as if it had been a catastrophe in which Saccard’s intelligence and kind-heartedness had been revealed to her. She added that she would sign the deed of transfer the next day, and that if it was really a disaster, she accepted it as a punishment for her sins. Maxime let her go on, chuckling, looking at her furtively; then he said in an undertone:
‘That’s right, that’s quite right.’
Laying his hand on Renée’s shoulder, he said more loudly: ‘Thank you, my dear, but I knew the story. How gullible you are!’ He moved away again as if to go. He was itching to tell her every-
thing. She had exasperated him with her eulogy of her husband, and he forgot that he had resolved not to say anything, so as to avoid any unpleasantness.


‘Why? What do you mean?’ she asked.
  ‘Well, that my father has been taking you for a ride. I’m sorry for you, I really am; you’re so naive!’
  He told her what he had heard at Laure’s, taking a secret delight in dwelling on these infamies. It seemed to him that he was taking his revenge for a vague insult he had received. His courtesan’s temperament lingered over this denunciation, over this cruel gossip about what he had heard behind a door. He spared Renée no detail, neither the money her husband had lent her nor what he meant to steal from her with the help of a few ridiculous fairy-tales. Renée listened, very pale. Standing before the ﬁreplace, she lowered her head a little as she gazed into the ﬁre. Her nightdress, which Maxime had warmed for her, opened out, revealing the motionless whiteness of a statue.
  ‘I’m telling you all this,’ the young man concluded, ‘so that you don’t look a fool. But you mustn’t hold it against my father. He means well. He has his faults, like all of us. Till tomorrow, then.’
  He retreated towards the door. Renée stopped him with a sudden gesture.
‘Don’t go!’ she cried imperiously.
  Seizing hold of him, and drawing him to her, almost sitting him  on her knees before the ﬁre, she kissed him on the lips and said:
  ‘I haven’t told you that since yesterday, when you said you wanted to break things oﬀ, I’ve been quite beside myself. I feel half mad. At the ball this evening I could hardly see. The fact is I can’t live without you. Don’t laugh, I mean it.’
  She gave him a look of inﬁnite tenderness, as if she had not seen him for a long time.
  ‘You were right, I was a fool, your father could have made me believe anything today. While he was talking to me I just heard a great buzzing, and I was so devastated by what you said that he could have made me go down on my knees, if he’d wanted to, to sign his wretched papers. I thought I felt remorse! Yes, I was stupid enough to think that!’
  She burst out laughing, a mad light shone in her eyes. Holding her lover even tighter, she continued:
  ‘Are we sinners, you and I? We’re in love, and we enjoy ourselves as we see ﬁt. That’s what everybody does now, isn’t it? Look at your father, he doesn’t care. He likes money and he takes it when he can
  
get it. He’s quite right... To  begin with, I won’t sign a thing, and   you must come back every evening. I was afraid you would refuse, because of what I told you. But you say you don’t mind. Besides, I’ll make sure he stays away now.’
  She stood up and lit the nightlight. Maxime, in despair, did not know what to say. He saw what a piece of folly he had perpetrated; he was annoyed with himself for having talked too much. How could he tell her now about his marriage? It was his fault, the break had been made, there had been no need for him to go up to her rooms again, and above all no need to show Renée that her husband was swindling her. He became even angrier with  himself  when  he  discovered  that he could no longer remember what had made him act as he did. He thought for a moment of being brutal a second time, but the sight of Renée taking oﬀ her slippers ﬁlled him with insurmountable cowardice. He was frightened. He stayed.
  The next day, when Saccard came to see his wife to make her sign the deed of transfer, she replied calmly that she had no intention of doing so, that she had thought better of it. On the other hand, she gave him no hint whatever of why she had changed her mind; she had sworn to be discreet, not wishing to create problems for herself, eager only to enjoy the renewal of her aﬀair. The Charonne business would sort itself out; her refusal to sign was merely an act of vengeance. Saccard was on the point of ﬂying into a rage. His whole  dream was crumbling. His other aﬀairs were going from bad to worse. He had exhausted his resources, and it was only by a miracle that he did not lose his balance: that very morning he had been unable to pay his baker’s bill. This did not prevent him from preparing a splendid entertainment for the Thursday in mid-Lent. Renée’s refusal provoked in him the incandescent rage of an energetic man hindered in his work by a child’s whim. If the deed were signed, he would be sure of being able to raise cash while waiting for the indemnity. When he had calmed down a little, and looked at things clearly, he was amazed at his wife’s sudden change of mind; someone must have advised her. He suspected a lover. He had such a strong intuition that he ran round to his sister to ask her if she knew anything about Renée’s private life. Sidonie showed her bitterness. She had not forgotten the aﬀront her sister-in-law had given her in refusing to see Monsieur de Saﬀré. So when she understood from her brother’s questions that he was accusing his wife of having a
  

lover, she cried out that she was certain of it, and oﬀered to spy on ‘the turtle-doves’. She would show the minx what she was made of. As a rule Saccard did not seek out unpleasant truths; self-interest alone compelled him to open his discreetly closed eyes. He accepted his sister’s oﬀer.
  ‘Don’t worry, I’ll ﬁnd out everything there is to know,’ she said, in a voice full of compassion. ‘Ah, my poor brother, Angèle would never have betrayed you! Such a good, generous husband! Those Parisian dolls have no heart. And to think I always gave her good advice!’
  


CHAPTER VI

There was a costume ball at the Saccards’ on Thursday in mid-Lent. The great event of the evening was the drama, The Loves of Narcissus and Echo, in three tableaux, which was to be performed by the ladies. The author of the drama, Monsieur Hupel de la Noue, had  for more than a month been travelling backwards and forwards between his Prefecture and the house in the Parc Monceau to superintend the rehearsals and advise on the costumes. At ﬁrst he had thought of writing his work in verse; then he had decided in favour of tableaux vivants; it was more digniﬁed, he said, and came nearer to the classical ideal.
  The ladies were given no rest. Some of them had no fewer than three changes of costume. There were endless discussions, over which the Prefect presided. To begin with, the character of Narcissus was considered at length. Was it to be played by a man or a woman? At last, after Renée’s entreaties, it was decided that the part should be entrusted to Maxime; but he was to be the only man, and even then Madame de Lauwerens declared that she would never have consented to this if ‘little Maxime had not been so like a real girl’. Renée was to be Echo. The question of the costumes was far more complicated. Maxime was most helpful to the Prefect, who was becoming very harassed in the midst of the nine women, whose wild imaginations threatened to compromise the pure outline of his work. Had  he listened to them, his Olympus would have worn powdered hair. Madame d’Espanet insisted on having a train cut on her dress to  hide her feet, which were a triﬂe large, while Madame Haﬀner had visions of herself clad in some sort of animal skin. Monsieur Hupel de la Noue became quite angry; he had made up his mind; he said that the only reason why he had decided against verse was that he might compose his drama ‘in cunningly contrived fabrics and the most beautiful eclectic poses’.
  ‘The general eﬀect, Mesdames,’ he repeated at each fresh demand, ‘you forget the general eﬀect. I can’t possibly spoil the whole thing for the sake of a lot of ﬂounces.’
  The discussions took place in the buttercup drawing room. Whole afternoons were spent deciding the cut of a skirt. Worms was called
  

in several times. At last everything was arranged, the costumes decided on, the positions learnt. Monsieur Hupel de la Noue declared himself satisﬁed. Not even the election of Monsieur de Mareuil had given him as much trouble.
  The Loves of Narcissus and Echo was to begin at eleven o’clock. At half-past ten the big drawing room was full, and as there was to be   a costume ball afterwards the women had come in costume and were seated on chairs arranged in a semicircle before the improvised stage, a platform hidden by two wide curtains of red velvet with gold fringes, running on rods. The men stood at the back, or moved to  and fro. At ten o’clock the upholsterers had driven in the last nail. The platform was erected at the end of the long drawing room, and occupied a whole section of it. The stage was approached from the smoking room, which had been turned into a green room for the actors. In addition, the ladies had at their disposal a number of rooms on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, where an army of maidservants laid out the costumes for the diﬀerent tableaux.
  It was half-past eleven, and the curtains were still drawn. A buzz of voices ﬁlled the drawing room. The rows of chairs oﬀered a bewildering display of marquises, noblewomen, milkmaids, Spanish ladies, shepherdesses, and sultanas, while the compact mass of dress-coats made a great black blotch next to the shimmering material and bare shoulders, all sparkling with jewellery. The women alone were in fancy dress. It was already getting warm. The three chandeliers lit up the gilt of the drawing room.
  At last Monsieur de la Noue was seen to emerge from an opening to the left of the platform. He had been helping the ladies since eight o’clock. The left sleeve of his dress-coat bore the mark of three white ﬁngers, a small woman’s hand, which had been laid there after dabbling in a box of rice-powder.  But the Prefect had other things on  his mind! His eyes were dilated, his face swollen and rather pale. He seemed unable to see anyone. Advancing towards Saccard, whom he recognized among a group of grave-looking men, he said in an undertone:
  ‘Damn it! Your wife has lost her girdle of leaves. We’re in a complete mess!’
  He swore, he could have hit  someone.  Then, without  waiting for a reply, he turned on his heels, dived under the curtains, and disappeared. The ladies smiled at this strange apparition.
  
  The group amid which Saccard was standing was clustered behind the last row of chairs. An armchair had even been pulled out of the row for Baron Gouraud, whose legs had been swelling for some time. Among the group were Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, whom the Emperor had just made a senator; Monsieur de Mareuil, whose second election the Chamber had deigned to conﬁrm; Monsieur Michelin, recently decorated; and, a little further back, Mignon and Charrier, of whom one wore a big diamond in his neck-tie, while the other displayed a still bigger one on his ﬁnger. The gentlemen chatted to each other. Saccard left them for a moment to go and exchange a few whispered words with his sister, who had just come in and was sitting between Louise de Mareuil and Madame Michelin. Madame Sidonie was disguised as a sorceress; Louise was jauntily attired in a page’s costume, which made her look like an urchin; little Madame Michelin, dressed as an almah, smiled seductively through her veils embroidered with threads of gold.
‘Have you discovered anything?’ Saccard quietly asked his sister. ‘No, not yet,’ she replied. ‘But I’ll catch them tonight, you can be
sure of that.’
‘You’ll let me know immediately, won’t you?’
  Saccard, turning to right and left, complimented Louise and Madame Michelin. He compared the latter to one of Mahomet’s houris, the former to a mignon of Henri III. His Provençal accent seemed to make the whole of his small, wiry body sing with delight. When he returned to the group of serious-looking men, Monsieur   de Mareuil took him aside and spoke to him of their children’s marriage. Nothing had changed, the contract would be signed the following Sunday.
  ‘Quite so,’ said Saccard. ‘I intend, with your permission, to announce the match to our friends this evening. I’m just waiting for my brother the minister, who has promised to come.’
  The new deputy was delighted. In the meantime, Monsieur Toutin-Laroche was speaking louder and louder, as if seized with a ﬁt of indignation.
  ‘Yes, Messieurs,’ he said to Monsieur Michelin and the two contractors, who came closer. ‘I was generous enough to let my name get mixed up in an aﬀair like that.’
As Saccard and Mareuil came up to them, he said:
‘I was telling these gentlemen about the terrible catastrophe of the


Société Générale of the Ports of Morocco. You know about it, don’t you, Saccard?’
  The latter did not ﬂinch. The company in question had just collapsed amid a terrible scandal. Shareholders had wanted to know what progress had been made with the establishment of the famous trading posts on the Mediterranean seaboard, and a judicial inquiry had shown that the Ports of Morocco existed only on the engineers’ plans: very handsome plans hung on the walls of the company’s oﬃces. Since then Monsieur Toutin-Laroche had been clamouring even louder than the shareholders, waxing indignant, demanding that his reputation should be restored without a stain. He made such a fuss that the Government, in order to calm this useful man and rehabilitate him in the eyes of public opinion, decided to send him to the Senate. This was how he had landed his prize seat, in an aﬀair that had nearly involved him in criminal proceedings.
  ‘It’s very good of you to show an interest in all that,’ said Saccard, ‘when you can point to your great work, the Crédit Viticole, which has survived every crisis.’
‘Yes,’ murmured de Mareuil, ‘it’s as safe as houses.’
  In fact the Crédit Viticole had just emerged from a serious but carefully concealed embarrassment. A minister who was very well disposed towards this ﬁnancial institution, which held the City by the throat, had brought on a bulling operation, which Monsieur Tourin-Laroche had turned to wonderfully good account. Nothing ﬂattered him more than praise for the prosperity of the Crédit Viticole. He thanked Monsieur de Mareuil with a glance, and bending over Baron Gouraud, on whose armchair he was leaning, asked him:
‘Are you comfortable? You’re not too warm?’ The Baron grunted.
  ‘He’s falling apart, getting worse every day,’ added Monsieur Toutin-Laroche under his breath, turning towards the other gentlemen.
  Monsieur Michelin smiled, looking down discreetly at his red ribbon from time to time. Mignon and Charrier, planted  solidly there in their big boots, seemed much more at ease in their dress-clothes since they had taken to wearing diamonds. However, it was nearly midnight, and the company was growing impatient; they were not so ill-bred as to complain, but the ladies’ fans ﬂuttered more nervously, and the sound of conversations increased.
  
  At last Monsieur Hupel de la Noue reappeared. He had thrust one shoulder through the narrow opening when he saw Madame  d’Espanet ﬁnally stepping onto the platform; the other ladies, already posed for the ﬁrst tableau, were waiting for her. The Prefect turned round, showing his back to the audience,  and  could  be  seen talking to the Marquise, who was hidden behind the curtains. He lowered his voice, and with compliments blown from his ﬁnger-tips, said:
‘Congratulations, Marquise. Your costume is delightful.’
  ‘I’ve got a much prettier one underneath!’ she replied, laughing in his face, so funny did he seem to her, buried as he was in the curtains. The boldness of this joke took Monsieur Hupel de la Noue aback for a moment; but he recovered his composure, and appreciating the remark more and more as he read hidden subtleties into it, murmured rapturously: ‘Charming, quite charming!’
  He dropped the corner of the curtain and joined the group of serious-looking men, wanting to enjoy his work. He was no longer the man running about desperately in search of Echo’s girdle of leaves. He beamed, panted, and wiped his forehead. He still had the mark of the little white hand on the sleeve of his coat; and the thumb of his right-hand glove, which he had no doubt dipped into one of the ladies’ make-up boxes, was stained with red. He smiled, fanned himself, and stammered:
‘She’s adorable, enchanting, astounding!’ ‘Who is?’ asked Saccard.
‘The Marquise. Do you know what she said just now?’
  He told the story. It was considered very witty. The gentlemen repeated it to one another. Even the digniﬁed Monsieur Haﬀner,   who had drawn nearer, could not help applauding. Meanwhile a piano, which few of them had noticed, began to play a waltz. Then there was a great silence. The waltz had endless, capricious variations; a very soft phrase rose from the keyboard, ﬁnishing in a nightingale’s trill; then deeper notes took up the theme, more slowly. It was very voluptuous. The ladies, their heads a little to one side, smiled. On the other hand the piano had put a sudden stop to Monsieur Hupel de la Noue’s merriment. He looked anxiously in   the direction of the red velvet curtains, thinking that he ought to  have posed Madame d’Espanet himself, as he had posed the others.
  

  The curtains opened slowly, the piano resumed the waltz, with the soft pedal down. A murmur ran through the drawing room. The ladies leant forward, the men craned their necks, while the audience’s admiration was shown here and there by a word too loudly spoken, an unconscious sigh, a stiﬂed laugh. This lasted for fully ﬁve minutes, under the glare of the three chandeliers.
  Monsieur Hupel de la Noue, relieved, beamed beatiﬁcally upon his drama. He could not resist the temptation to repeat to those around him what he had been saying for the last month:
  ‘I thought of doing it in verse. But don’t you agree it’s more digniﬁed like this?’
  Then, while the waltz rose and fell in an endless lullaby, he explained. Mignon and Charrier had drawn nearer and were listening attentively.
  ‘You know the subject, don’t you? The handsome Narcissus, son of the River Cephisus and the Nymph Liriope, scorns the love of the Nymph Echo. Echo was a member of Juno’s retinue, and amused her with her stories while Jupiter found pleasure elsewhere. Echo, daughter of the Air and the Earth, as you know...’
  He went into transports over the poetry of mythology.  Then,  more conﬁdentially, he said:
  ‘I thought I might give full rein to my imagination. Echo leads the handsome Narcissus to Venus in a grotto on the seashore, so that the goddess might inﬂame him with her passion. But the goddess is powerless. The young man indicates by his attitude that he is unmoved.’
  The explanation was not unhelpful, for few of the spectators in  the drawing room understood the exact meaning of the groups. When the Prefect had named the characters in an undertone the admiration increased. Mignon and Charrier continued to stare with wide-open eyes. They had understood nothing.
  On the platform, between the red velvet curtains, yawned a grotto. The scenery was made of silk stretched in large broken plaits, imitating the crevices of rocks, upon which were painted shells, ﬁsh, and large sea-plants. The stage, which was uneven, rose up like a mound, and was covered with the same silk, upon which the set-designer had depicted a ﬁne sandy background, scattered with pearls and silver spangles. It was a retreat ﬁt for a goddess. There, on the top of       the mound, stood Madame de Lauwerens as Venus; rather stout,
  
wearing her pink tights with the dignity of an Olympian duchess, she interpreted her part as the Queen of Love with large, voracious eyes. Behind her, showing only her mischievous head, her wings, and her quiver, little Madame Daste lent her smile to the amiable character  of Cupid. Then on one side of the mound the three Graces, Mesdames de Guende, Teissière, and de Meinhold, all in muslin, stood smiling and intertwined as in Pradier’s group; while on the other side the Marquise d’Espanet and Madame Haﬀner, enveloped in the same ﬂow of lace, their arms round each other’s waists, their hair inter-mingled, added a risky note to the tableau, reminiscent of Lesbos, which Monsieur Hupel de la Noue explained quietly for the beneﬁt of the men only, saying that he intended by this to show the extent of Venus’ power. At the foot of the mound the Comtesse Vanska impersonated Voluptuousness: she lay outstretched, twisted by a ﬁnal spasm, her eyes half closed, and languishing, as if satiated; very dark, she had unloosened her black hair, and her bodice, streaked with tawny ﬂames, revealed portions of her glowing skin. The colour scale of the costumes, from the snowy white of Venus’ veil to the dark red of Voluptuousness’s bodice, was soft, generally pink, ﬂesh-coloured. Under the electric light, ingeniously directed at the stage from one of the garden windows, the gauze, the lace, all those light, diaphanous materials mingled so well with the shoulders and tights that the soft pinks seemed alive, and it was no longer possible to tell whether the ladies had not carried plastic truth so far as to strip themselves naked. All this was but the apotheosis: the play was enacted in the foreground. On the left Renée, as Echo, stretched her arms out towards the tall goddess, her head half turned towards Narcissus, pleadingly, as if inviting him to look at Venus, the mere sight of whom kindled irresistible passion; but Narcissus, on the right, made a gesture of refusal, hid his eyes with his hand, remained cold as ice. The costumes of these two characters in particular had cost Monsieur Hupel de la Noue’s imagination inﬁnite trouble. Narcissus, as a wandering demigod of the forests, wore an ideal huntsman’s costume: green tights, a short, clinging jacket, a leafy twig of oak in his hair. Echo’s costume was an allegory in itself: it suggested tall trees and lofty mountains, the resounding spots where the voices of the Earth and the Air reply to each other; it was rock in the white satin  of the skirt, thicket in the leaves of the girdle, clear sky in the cloud of blue gauze of the bodice. The groups retained a statuesque


immobility, the ﬂeshly note of Olympus sang in the eﬀulgence of the broad ray of light, while the piano continued its penetrating complaint of love, interspersed with deep sighs.
  It was generally thought that Maxime embodied the part very  well. In making his gesture of refusal he accentuated his left hip, which was much remarked upon. But all the praise was for Renée’s expression. As Monsieur Hupel de la Noue put it, she represented ‘the pain of unsatisﬁed desire’. She wore a bitter smile that tried to look humble, she sought her prey with the entreaties of a she-wolf who only half hides her teeth. The ﬁrst tableau went oﬀ well, except for the mad Adeline, who moved, and could hardly repress her desire to laugh. At last the curtains closed, the piano fell silent.
  The audience applauded discreetly, and the conversations were resumed. A great breath of love, of restrained desire, had come from the nude ﬁgures on the stage and passed through the drawing room, where the women leaned more languidly in their seats, while the men murmured in each others’ ears, smiling. There was whispering as in an alcove, a well-bred hush, a barely formulated longing for voluptuousness; and in the mute looks exchanged amid this decorous rapture there was the frank boldness of pleasure oﬀered and accepted with a glance.
  Endless judgements were passed on the ladies’ good points. Their costumes attracted almost as much attention as their bare shoulders. When Mignon and Charrier turned to question Monsieur Hupel de  la Noue, they were quite surprised to ﬁnd him no longer beside them; he had already dived behind the stage.
  ‘As I was telling you, my pet,’ said Madame Sidonie, resuming a conversation interrupted by the ﬁrst tableau, ‘I’ve had a letter from London, about that business of the three hundred million francs,   you know. The person I used to make enquiries thinks he’s found the banker’s receipt. England must have paid... It made me ill all day.’
  She was yellower than usual, in her sorceress’s robe spangled with stars. As Madame Michelin was not listening, she continued in a lower voice, muttering that England could not have paid, and that she must go to London herself.
  ‘Narcissus’ dress was very pretty, wasn’t it?’ asked Louise of Madame Michelin.
  The latter smiled. She looked at Baron Gouraud, who seemed quite cheerful again in his armchair. Madame Sidonie, observing the
  
direction of her glance, leant over and whispered in her ear, so that the child could not hear:
‘Has he settled up?’
  ‘Yes,’ replied the young woman languidly, playing her almah part delightfully. ‘I’ve chosen the house at Louveciennes, and I’ve received the title deeds from his business agent. But we’ve broken oﬀ, I don’t see him any more.’
  Louise was particularly sharp at catching what she was not intended to hear. She looked at Baron Gouraud with a page’s boldness, and said quietly to Madame Michelin:
‘Don’t you think the Baron looks hideous?’ Then she added, bursting out laughing:
  ‘I say! They should have made him play Narcissus. He would have been wonderful in apple-green tights.’
  The sight of Venus, of this voluptuous corner of Olympus, had revived the old senator. He rolled his eyes in delight, turned half round to compliment Saccard. Amid the buzz that ﬁlled the drawing room, the group of serious-looking men continued to talk business and politics. Monsieur Haﬀner said he had just been appointed chairman of a committee charged with settling indemnity questions. Then the conversation turned to the reconstruction of the city,  to   the Boulevard du Prince-Eugène, which was beginning to attract public attention. Saccard took the opportunity to talk about somebody he knew, a landlord who would no doubt be expropriated. He looked the others in the eyes. The Baron nodded; Monsieur Toutin-Laroche went so far as to declare that there was nothing so unpleasant as to be expropriated; Monsieur Michelin agreed, squinting  more than ever as he looked at his decoration.
  ‘The indemnity can never be too high,’ concluded Monsieur de Mareuil, who wanted to please Saccard.
  They had understood each other. But Mignon and Charrier began to talk about their own aﬀairs. They meant to retire soon, they said, no doubt to Langres, keeping on a pied-à-terre in Paris. They made the others smile when they related how, after completing the building of their magniﬁcent mansion in the Boulevard Malesherbes, they had thought it so handsome that they had not been able to resist the desire to sell it. Their diamonds must have been a consolation they had oﬀered themselves. Saccard laughed ungraciously; his former partners had just realized enormous proﬁts in an aﬀair in which he
  

had played the part of a dupe. As the interval wore on, admiring comments on Venus’ breasts and Echo’s costume broke into the conversation of the serious-looking gentlemen.
  After more than half an hour Monsieur Hupel de la Noue reappeared. He was on the high road to success, and the disorder     of his attire increased. As he regained his place, he came upon Monsieur de Mussy. He shook hands with him as he went by, and then turned back and asked him:
‘Did you hear what the Marquise said?’
  Without waiting for a reply, he told him the story. He appreciated it more and more, made comments on it, and ended by thinking it exquisitely ingenuous. ‘I’ve got a much prettier one underneath!’ It was a cry from the heart.
  Monsieur de Mussy disagreed. He thought the remark indecent. He had just received a posting to the London Embassy, where the minister had told him that strict behaviour was expected. He refused to lead the cotillon, he behaved like a much older man, he no longer spoke of his love for Renée, to whom he bowed gravely when he  saw her.
  Monsieur Hupel de la Noue had come up to the group standing behind the Baron’s armchair, when the piano struck up a triumphal march. A loud burst of harmony, produced by masterful strokes on the keyboard, introduced a full melody in which a metallic clang resounded at intervals. As each phrase was ﬁnished, it was repeated in a higher key that accentuated the rhythm. It was at once ﬁerce and joyous.
  ‘You’ll see,’ murmured Monsieur Hupel de la Noue, ‘that I have perhaps carried poetic licence too far, but I think my boldness has worked. Echo, seeing that Venus has no power over Narcissus, takes him to Plutus, the god of wealth and precious metals. After the temptation of the ﬂesh, the temptation of riches.’
  ‘That’s very classical,’ replied Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, with an amiable smile. ‘You know your period, Monsieur le Préfet.’
  The curtains parted, the piano played more loudly. The spectacle was dazzling. The electric light fell on a scene of ﬁery splendour in which the spectators at ﬁrst saw nothing but a brazier, in which precious stones and ingots of gold seemed to be melting. A new grotto revealed itself; but this was not the cool retreat of Venus, lapped by waters eddying on ﬁne sand bestrewn with pearls, but one
  
situated seemingly in the centre of the earth, in a ﬁery nether region, a ﬁssure of the hell of antiquity, a crevice in a mine of molten metals inhabited by Plutus. The silk simulating rock showed broad threads of metal, layers that looked like the veins of a primeval world, loaded with incalculable riches and the eternal life of the earth. On the ground, thanks to a bold anachronism of Monsieur Hupel de la Noue’s, lay a great pile of twenty-franc pieces.
  On top of this pile of gold sat Madame de Guende as Plutus, a female Plutus with generously displayed breasts set in the great stripes of her dress, which represented all the metals. Around the god, erect, reclining, grouped in clusters, or blooming apart, were posed the fairy-like ﬂora of the grotto, into which the caliphs of the Arabian Nights seemed to have emptied their treasures: Madame Haﬀner as Gold, with a stiﬀ, resplendent skirt like a bishop’s cape; Madame d’Espanet as Silver, gleaming like moonlight; Madame de Lauwerens in bright blue, as a Sapphire, and by her side little Madame Daste, a smiling Turquoise in the softest blue; then there was an Emerald, Madame de Meinhold; a Topaz, Madame Teissière; and lower down, the Comtesse Vanska,  lending her dark ardour to    a Coral, recumbent, with raised arms loaded with rosy pendants,   like a monstrous, seductive polyp displaying a woman’s ﬂesh  amidst the yawning, pink pearliness of its shell. All of these ladies wore necklaces, bracelets, sets of jewels formed of the precious stones they impersonated. Especially noticeable were the jewels worn by Mesdames d’Espanet and Haﬀner, made up entirely of small gold and silver coins fresh from the mint. In the foreground the story remained unchanged: Echo was still tempting Narcissus, who continued to reject her overtures. The spectators’ eyes were getting used to this yawning cavity opening onto the ﬂaming bowels of the earth, onto this pile of gold upon which were strewn the riches of a world.
  This second tableau was even more successful than the ﬁrst. It seemed particularly ingenious. The audacity of the twenty-franc pieces, this stream of money from a modern safe that had fallen into a corner of Greek mythology, captured the imagination of the ladies and ﬁnanciers present. The words, ‘So much gold! So much money!’ ﬂitted round, with smiles, with long tremors of satisfaction; and each of these ladies and gentlemen dreamt of owning all this money themselves, coﬀered in their cellars.
  

  ‘England has paid up; there are your millions,’ Louise whispered maliciously in Madame Sidonie’s ear.
  Madame Michelin, her mouth slightly open with desire, threw back her almah’s veil and fondled the gold with glittering eyes, while the group of serious-looking gentlemen went into transports of delight. Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, beaming, whispered a few words in the ear of the Baron, whose face was becoming covered with yellow blotches; while Mignon and Charrier, less discreet, crudely exclaimed:
  ‘Damn it! There’s enough there to demolish the whole of Paris and rebuild it.’
  This remark seemed quite profound to Saccard, who was beginning to suspect that Mignon and Charrier just made fun of people under the pretence of idiocy. When the curtains fell once more, and the piano ﬁnished its triumphal march with a tumult of notes thrown pell-mell, like a last shovelful of crown pieces, there was a burst of applause, this time louder and more prolonged.
  Meanwhile, in the middle of the tableau, the minister, accompanied by his secretary, Monsieur de Saﬀré, had appeared at the  door of the drawing room. Saccard, who was impatiently looking out for his brother, wanted to rush forward to welcome him. But the latter gestured for him to stay where he was. He slowly approached the group of serious-looking gentlemen. When the curtains had closed, and he was recognized, a long whisper travelled round the drawing room, all heads looked round: the minister counterbalanced the success of The Loves of Narcissus and Echo.
  ‘You’re a poet, Monsieur le Préfet,’ he said, smiling, to Monsieur Hupel de la Noue. ‘You once published a volume of verse, Les Volubilis, I believe? I see the cares of administration have not impaired your imagination.’
  The Prefect detected in this compliment the sting of an epigram. The sudden appearance of his superior disconcerted him, the more  so as, glancing to see if his dress was in order, he noticed on his sleeve the little white hand, which he did not dare to brush oﬀ. He bowed and stammered a reply.
  ‘Really,’ continued the minister, addressing Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, Baron Gouraud, and the other personages present, ‘all that gold made a wonderful spectacle. We’d be able to achieve so much if Monsieur Hupel de la Noue coined money for us.’
  
  This repeated, in ministerial language, the remark made by Mignon and Charrier. Then Monsieur Toutin-Laroche and the others paid their court, and rang the changes on the minister’s last phrase: the Empire had done wonders already; there was no lack of gold, thanks to the experience and skill of the Government; never had France stood so tall in the councils of Europe; and the gentlemen ended by uttering such platitudes that the minister himself changed the subject.
  He listened to them with his head high, the corners of his mouth slightly upturned, which gave his fat, white, clean-shaven face an expression of scepticism and smiling disdain.
  Saccard looked for an opportunity to make his announcement of the marriage of Maxime and Louise. He assumed a very relaxed air, and his brother, with mock geniality, was good-natured enough to help him by pretending great aﬀection for him. He was really the superior of the two, with his steady gaze, his obvious contempt for petty criminality, and his broad shoulders, which, with a shrug, could have ﬂoored all those present. When at last the marriage was mentioned, he became charming, and let it be understood that he  had his wedding present ready; he even suggested that Maxime might be appointed auditor to the Council of State. He went so far as to repeat twice to his brother:
‘Tell your son I’ll be his witness.’
  Monsieur de Mareuil blushed with delight. Saccard was congratulated. Monsieur Toutin-Laroche oﬀered to be second witness.  Then, suddenly, they began to talk of divorce. A member of the opposition, said Monsieur Haﬀner, had just had the audacity to defend this social scandal. Everyone protested. Their sense of propriety was expressed in very profound observations. Monsieur Michelin smiled feebly at the minister, while Mignon and Charrier noted with surprise that the collar of his dress-coat was worn.
  Meanwhile Monsieur Hupel de la Noue remained ill at ease, leaning against the armchair of Baron Gouraud, who had contented himself with silently shaking hands with the minister. The poet dared not leave the spot. A vague feeling, a dread of appearing ridiculous, a fear of losing the favour of his superior detained him, despite his furious desire to go and pose the ladies on the stage for the last tableau. He waited for some happy remark to occur to him and restore him to favour. But he could think of nothing. He felt
  

more and more embarrassed when he saw Monsieur de Saﬀré; he took his arm and clung on to him as to a life-raft. The young man had just arrived, he was a fresh victim.
‘Have you heard what the Marquise said?’ asked the Prefect.
  But he was so agitated that he was no longer able to tell the story properly.
I said to her, ‘You have a charming costume, and she replied...’ ‘I’ve got a much prettier one underneath,’ quietly added Monsieur
de Saﬀré. ‘It’s an old one, my dear sir, very old.’
  Monsieur Hupel de la Noue looked at him in consternation. He was just about to reﬁne his commentary on the ingenuousness of this cry from the heart!
  ‘Old,’ replied the secretary, ‘as old as the hills: Madame d’Espanet has already said it twice at the Tuileries.’
  This was the last straw. What did the Prefect care now for the minister, for the whole drawing room? He turned towards the stage, when the piano played a prelude, in a sad tone, with a tremulous series of notes; then the plaintive strain increased, dragged on for some time, and the curtains parted. Monsieur Hupel de la Noue, who had already half disappeared, returned to the drawing room when he heard the soft grating of the curtain-rings. He was pale, exasperated; he made a great eﬀort to prevent himself from insulting the ladies. They had posed themselves without him! It must have been that little d’Espanet woman who had urged them to hasten the changes of costume and dispense with his help. It was all wrong, it was worth nothing at all!
  He returned, mumbling inaudibly. He looked at the stage, and muttered:
  ‘Echo is too near the edge. And Narcissus’ leg, it’s not digniﬁed, not digniﬁed at all.’
  Mignon and Charrier, who had come closer in order to hear the explanation, ventured to ask him what the young man and the young girl were doing on the ground. He did not reply, refusing to explain his poem any further; and as the contractors insisted, he said:
  ‘I’m not interested any more, now that the ladies have chosen to pose without consulting me!’
  The piano sobbed softly. On the stage, a glade into which the electric light threw a shaft of sunshine revealed a vista of foliage. It was an ideal glade, with blue trees and big red and yellow ﬂowers that
  
rose as high as the oaks. There, on a grassy knoll, lay Venus and Plutus, side by side, surrounded by nymphs who had hurried from the neighbouring thickets to serve as their escort. There were daughters of the trees, daughters of the springs, daughters of the mountains, all the laughing, naked divinities of the forest. The god and goddess triumphed, punished the indiﬀerence of the proud one who had scorned them, while the group of nymphs looked on curiously and in pious terror at the vengeance of Olympus in the foreground. There the drama unfolded. The handsome Narcissus, lying at the edge of a pool that came down from the back of the stage, was looking at himself in the limpid mirror; and realism had been carried so far that a piece of real looking-glass had been placed at the bottom of the pool. But he had already ceased to be a free young man, the forest wanderer. Death surprised him in the midst of his rapt admiration of his own image, Death enervated him, and Venus, her ﬁnger outstretched, like a fairy in a transformation scene, cast the fatal spell. He was turning into a ﬂower. His limbs became verdant, elongated, in his tight-ﬁtting costume of green satin; the ﬂexible stalk, formed by his slightly bent legs, was on the point of sinking into the ground and taking root, while his body, adorned with broad lappets of white satin, blossomed into a wondrous corolla. Maxime’s fair hair completed the illusion, and his long curls set yellow pistils amid the whiteness of the petals. The great nascent ﬂower, still human, inclined its head towards the spring, its eyes moist, its countenance smiling in voluptuous ecstasy, as if Narcissus had satisﬁed in death the passion he had inspired in himself. A few paces away Echo was dying of frustrated desire; she found herself caught little by little in the hard ground, she felt her burning limbs freezing and stiﬀening. She was no vulgar moss-stained rock, but one of white marble, through her arms and shoulders, through her long snow-white robe, from which the girdle of leaves and the blue drapery had slipped down. Sinking into the satin of her skirt, which was creased in large folds, like a block of Parian marble, she threw herself back, retaining nothing of life in her cold sculptured body except her gleaming  eyes, ﬁxed on the water-lily reclining languidly above the mirror of the spring. It already seemed as if all the love-sounds of the forest, the long-drawn-out voices of the thickets, the mystic shivers of the leaves, the deep sighs of the tall oaks, were beating upon the marble ﬂesh of Echo, whose heart, still bleeding within the rock, continued


to throb, repeating from afar the slightest complaints of Earth and
Air.
  ‘Oh, how they’ve rigged out poor Maxime!’ murmured Louise. ‘And Madame Saccard looks like a corpse.’
‘She’s covered with rice-powder,’ said Madame Michelin.
  Other rather uncomplimentary remarks were heard. This third tableau was not an unqualiﬁed success like the two others, and yet it was this tragic ending that ﬁlled Monsieur Hupel de la Noue with enthusiasm for his own talent. He admired himself in it, as did Narcissus in his piece of looking-glass. He had put into it a host of poetic and philosophical allusions. When the curtains closed for the last time, and the spectators had applauded politely, he felt mortiﬁed at having yielded to anger and not explained the last page of his drama. He tried to give the people around him the key to the charming, grandiose, or simply mischievous ideas represented by Narcissus and Echo, and he even tried to say what Venus and Plutus were doing in the glade; but these ladies and gentlemen, whose practical minds had understood the grotto of ﬂesh and the grotto of gold, were not interested in the Prefect’s mythological explanations. Only Mignon and Charrier, who wanted to know everything, were kind enough    to question him. He kept them standing for nearly two hours in a window-recess, telling them about Ovid’s Metamorphoses.
  Meanwhile the minister had left. He apologized for not being able to stay to congratulate the beautiful Madame Saccard on the perfect grace of her Echo. He had gone three or four times round the drawing room arm-in-arm with his brother, shaking hands with the men and bowing to the ladies. Never had he compromised himself so much for Saccard. He left him radiant when, on the threshold, he said loudly:
‘I’ll expect you tomorrow morning for breakfast.’
  The ball was about to begin. The servants had arranged the ladies’ chairs against the walls. The big drawing room now displayed, from the little yellow drawing room to the stage, its great expanse of carpet, whose large purple ﬂowers opened out under the dripping light that fell from the crystal chandeliers. It grew hotter, the reﬂection of the red hangings burnished the gilt of the furniture and the ceiling. To open the ball, they were waiting for the ladies, Echo, Venus, Plutus, and the rest, to change their costumes.
Madame d’Espanet and Madame Haﬀner were the ﬁrst to appear.

They had resumed the costumes they wore in the second tableau;  one was Gold, the other Silver. They were surrounded and congratulated; they described how they had felt.
  ‘I almost exploded with laughter,’ said the Marquise, ‘when I saw Monsieur Toutin-Laroche’s big nose pointing at me in the distance!’ ‘I think I’ve got a crick in my neck,’ drawled the fair-haired Suzanne. ‘Really, if it had lasted a minute longer I would have put
my head back in a normal position, my neck was hurting so much.’ From the recess into which he had driven Mignon and Charrier,
Monsieur Hupel de la Noue kept glancing at the group that had formed round the two ladies; he was afraid they were laughing at him. The other nymphs arrived one after the other; all had resumed their costumes as precious stones: the Comtesse Vanska, as Coral, achieved a stupendous success when the ingenious details of her dress were looked at closely. Then Maxime entered, impeccable in dress-clothes, and wearing a smile; a crowd of women enveloped him, he was placed in the centre of the circle and teased about his ﬂoral character and his passion for mirrors; unembarrassed, as if delighted with his part, he continued to smile, joked back, confessed that he adored himself and that he was suﬃciently cured of women to prefer himself to them. The laughter increased, the group grew larger and took up the whole of the middle of the drawing room, while the young man, lost in this army of shoulders, in this medley of dazzling costumes, retained his fragrance of depraved love, the gentleness of a pale, vicious ﬂower.
  When Renée ﬁnally came down, there was a hush. She had put on a new costume of such original grace and audacity that the ladies and the men, though used to her eccentricities, gave a sudden start of surprise. She was dressed as a Tahitian. This costume, it would seem, is by way of being very primitive: a pair of soft tinted tights that reached from her feet to her breasts, leaving her arms and shoulders bare, and over these tights a simple muslin blouse, short and trimmed with two ﬂounces so as to hide her hips a little. A wreath of wild ﬂowers in her hair; gold bangles on her wrists and ankles. And nothing more. She was naked. The tights had the suppleness of ﬂesh under the muslin blouse; the pure naked outline was visible, vaguely blurred by the ﬂounces from the armpits to    the knees, but at the slightest movement reappearing between the meshes of the lace. She was an adorable savage, a barbarous and
  

voluptuous woman, barely hidden beneath a white haze, a cloud of sea-mist, beneath which her whole body could be discerned.
  Renée, rosy-cheeked, stepped forward. Céleste had managed to split the ﬁrst pair of tights; fortunately Renée, foreseeing this eventuality, had taken precautions. The torn tights had delayed her. She seemed to care little for her triumph. Her hands burned, her eyes glittered with fever. She smiled, however, responding brieﬂy to the men who stopped her to congratulate her on the chasteness of her attitudes in the tableaux vivants. She left in her wake a trail of dress-coats astounded at the transparency of her muslin blouse. When she reached the group of women surrounding Maxime, she occasioned short cries of admiration, and the Marquise began to eye her from head to foot, murmuring:
‘She has a marvellous ﬁgure.’
  Madame Michelin, whose almah dress appeared hideously ponderous beside this simple veil, pursed her lips, while Madame Sidonie, shrivelled up in her black sorceress’s dress, whispered in her ear:
  ‘It’s the height of indecency: don’t you think so, you beautiful thing?’
  ‘Well!’ said the pretty brunette at last, ‘how angry Monsieur Michelin would be if I undressed like that.’
‘Quite right too,’ concluded the businesswoman.
  The band of serious-looking men was not of this opinion. They drooled from a distance. Monsieur Michelin, whom his wife had     so inappropriately quoted, went into ecstasies, in order to please Monsieur Toutin-Laroche and Baron Gouraud, who were enraptured by the sight of Renée. Saccard was greatly complimented on his wife’s ﬁgure. He bowed, he professed to be quite moved. The evening was an auspicious one for him, and but for an occasional moment of distraction when he glanced in the direction of his sister, he appeared perfectly happy.
  ‘I say, she has never showed us as much as that before,’ said Louise playfully in Maxime’s ear.
She corrected herself, and added, with a mystifying smile: ‘At least, not to me.’
  The young man looked at her in alarm, but she continued smiling, like a schoolboy delighted with a rather crude joke.
  The ball began. The stage of tableaux vivants had been used to accommodate a small band, in which brass predominated; and the
  
clear notes of the horns and cornets rang out in the ideal forest with the blue trees. First came a quadrille: ‘Ah, il a des bottes, il a des bottes, Bastien!’, which was at that time extremely popular in the dance-halls. The ladies danced. Polkas, waltzes, and mazurkas alternated with the quadrilles. The swirling couples moved backwards and forwards, ﬁlling the long gallery, bounding in response to the brass, swaying to the lullaby of the violins. The fancy dresses, the cavalcade of women from every country and every period, rocked to and fro in a swarming medley of bright materials. After mingling and carrying oﬀ the colours in cadenced confusion, the rhythm, at certain strokes of the bow, abruptly brought back the same pink satin tunic, the same blue velvet bodice, side by side with the same dress-coat. Then another stroke of the bows and blast of the cornets pushed the couples on, made them travel in single ﬁle round the drawing room, with the swaying motion of a rowing-boat with a snapped painter drifting in the wind. And so on, endlessly, for hours. Sometimes, between two dances, a lady went to a window, suﬀocating, to breathe in a little of the fresh air; couples rested on a sofa in the little buttercup drawing room, or went into the hothouse, strolling slowly round the pathways. Skirts, their edges alone visible, laughed languidly under the arbours of creepers, in the depths of the warm shadow, where the forte notes of the cornets penetrated during the quadrilles of ‘Ohé les p’tits agneaux!’ and ‘J’ai un pied qui r’mue!’
  When the servants opened the door to the dining room, transformed into a refreshment buﬀet, with sideboards against the walls and a long table in the middle laden with cold cuts, there was a great crush. A tall, handsome man, who had modestly kept his hat in his hand, was so violently ﬂattened against the wall that the hat burst  with a pitiful moan. This made everyone laugh. They rushed at the pastries and the truﬄed game, digging their elbows into one another. There was a general pillage, hands met over meat dishes, and the lackeys did not know whom to serve in this band of well-bred men, whose outstretched arms expressed their terrible fear of arriving too late and ﬁnding the dishes empty. An old gentleman grew angry because there was no claret, and champagne, he maintained, kept him awake.
  ‘Gently, Messieurs, gently,’ said Baptiste in his grave voice. ‘There’s enough for everyone.’
  

  But nobody listened. The dining room was full, and anxious dress-coats stood on tiptoe at the door. Before the sideboards stood groups, eating quickly, crowding together. Many swallowed their food without drinking, not having been able to lay their hands on a glass. Others, on the contrary, drank and looked in vain for a morsel of bread.
  ‘Listen,’ said Monsieur Hupel de la Noue, whom Mignon and Charrier, sick of mythology, had dragged to the supper room, ‘we shan’t get a thing if we don’t stick together. It’s much worse at the Tuileries, and I know what I’m talking about. You look after the wine, I’ll see to the food.’
  The Prefect had his eye on a leg of mutton. He stretched out his arm at the right moment through a sudden gap in the mass of shoulders, and quietly carried it oﬀ after stuﬃng his pockets with rolls. The contractors reappeared, Mignon with one bottle of champagne, Charrier with two; but they had only been able to ﬁnd two glasses; they said that it did not matter, they would drink out of the same one. They all supped from the corner of a ﬂower-stand at the end of the room. They did not even take oﬀ their gloves, but put the slices already cut from the leg of mutton between their bread, and kept the bottles under their arms. Standing up, they talked with their mouths full, stretching out their chins so that the gravy would fall on the carpet.
  Charrier, having ﬁnished his wine before his bread, asked a servant to get him a glass of champagne.
  ‘You’ll have to wait, Monsieur!’ the servant angrily replied, forgetting that he was not in the kitchen. ‘Three hundred bottles have been ﬁnished already.’
  Meanwhile the band was playing louder and louder, in sudden bursts. They were dancing the Kisses Polka, extremely popular in public dance-halls, and whose rhythm each dancer had to mark by embracing his partner. Madame d’Espanet appeared at the door of the dining room, ﬂushed, her hair a little disarranged, trailing her long silver dress with a charming air of lassitude. As hardly anyone moved, she was obliged to push people aside. She walked slowly  round the table, looking sulky. Then she came up to Monsieur Hupel de la Noue, who had ﬁnished eating and was wiping his mouth with his handkerchief.
‘It would be extremely kind of you, Monsieur,’ she said with a

bewitching smile, ‘if you would ﬁnd me a chair. I’ve been all round the table.’
  The Prefect had a grudge against the Marquise, but his gallantry gave him no choice: he sprang into action, found a chair, installed Madame d’Espanet, and stood behind to wait on her. She would only have a few prawns, with a little butter, and half a glass of champagne. She ate daintily amid the gluttony of the men. The table and the chairs were reserved exclusively for the ladies. But an exception was always made for Baron Gouraud. There he was, sitting comfortably in front of a piece of game pie, slowly munching the crust. The Marquise won back the Prefect by telling him that she would never forget her artistic emotions in The Loves of Narcissus and Echo. She even explained, in a way that completely consoled him, why they had not waited for him: the ladies, on learning that the minister was there, had thought it would be impolite to prolong the interval. She ended by asking him to go and look for Madame Haﬀner, who was dancing with Mr Simpson, a brute of a man whom she disliked, she said. When Suzanne appeared, she completely forgot Monsieur Hupel de la Noue.
  Saccard, followed by Messieurs Toutin-Laroche, de Mareuil, and Haﬀner, had taken possession of a sideboard. As there was no room at the table, and Monsieur de Saﬀré was passing by with Madame Michelin on his arm, he stopped them and insisted that the pretty brunette should join his party. She nibbled at some pastry, smiling, raising her bright eyes to the ﬁve men who surrounded her. They leant over her, touched her almah’s veils embroidered with threads of gold, and forced her up against the sideboard, on which she ended by leaning, taking cakes from every hand, with the docility of a slave amid her masters. Monsieur Michelin, alone at the other end of the room, was ﬁnishing oﬀ a pot of pâté de foie gras which he had succeeded in capturing.
  Meanwhile Madame Sidonie, who had been prowling about ever since the ﬁrst strokes of the bow had opened the ball, entered the dining room and summoned Saccard with a glance.
  ‘She isn’t dancing,’ she said softly. ‘She seems restless. I think she’s considering something desperate. But I don’t know yet who the young man is. I must have something to eat and go back and see what I can see.’
Standing up, like a man, she ate a chicken wing, which she got


Monsieur Michelin, who had ﬁnished his pâté, to give her. She poured herself a large glass of malaga, and then, after wiping her lips with her ﬁngers, returned to the drawing room. The train of her sorceress’s dress seemed already to have collected all the dust from the carpets.
  The ball was ﬂagging, the band was showing signs of fatigue, when a murmur circulated: ‘The cotillon! The cotillon!’ This put fresh life into the dancers and the brass. Couples appeared from all the shrubberies in the hothouse; the big drawing room ﬁlled up as  for the ﬁrst quadrille. The men who were not dancing looked on benevolently from the window-recesses as a talkative group in the middle of the room continued to grow; the supper-eaters in the next room craned their necks to see, without abandoning their food.
  ‘Monsieur de Mussy says he won’t dance,’ said a lady. ‘He swears he never leads the cotillon now. Please, just once more, Monsieur de Mussy, just this. Just to please us.’
  But the young attaché remained stiﬀ and serious in his wing collar. It was really impossible, for he had sworn not to. There was general disappointment. Maxime refused too, saying that he was worn out. Monsieur Hupel de la Noue dared not oﬀer his services; he was only interested in poetry. A lady who suggested Mr Simpson was promptly silenced; Mr Simpson was the most extraordinary cotillon-leader you ever saw; he had a penchant for fantastic and mischievous ideas; at one dance where they had been so imprudent as to choose him, it was said that he had made the ladies jump over the chairs, and one of his favourite ﬁgures was to make everybody go round the room on all fours.
‘Has Monsieur de Saﬀré gone?’ asked a childish voice.
  He was just going, he was saying goodbye to the beautiful Madame Saccard, with whom he was on the best of terms since her refusal to have anything to do with him. The amiable sceptic admired the whims of others. He was brought back in triumph from the hall. He resisted, saying with a smile that they were embarrassing him, that this wasn’t his kind of thing. Then, seeing all the white hands stretched out towards him, he said:
  ‘Come on, take up your positions. But I warn you, I belong to the old school. I have no imagination at all.’
  The couples sat down around the room, on all the chairs that could be found; young men were even sent to fetch the iron chairs
  
from the hothouse. It was a monster cotillon. Monsieur de Saﬀré,  who wore the rapt expression of a celebrant priest, chose as his partner Countess Vanska, whose Coral costume fascinated him. When everyone was in position, he cast a long look at the circle of skirts, each ﬂanked by a dress-coat. Then he nodded to the band, whose brass resounded. Heads leaned forward along the smiling line of faces.
  Renée declined to take part in the cotillon. She had been nervous all evening, scarcely dancing, mingling with the groups, unable to stay still. Her friends thought she seemed odd. She had talked, during the evening, of making a balloon journey with a celebrated aeronaut who was the talk of Paris. When the cotillon began, she was annoyed at no longer being able to walk about freely; she stationed herself at the door leading to the hall, shaking hands with the men who were leaving, talking with her husband’s closest associates. Baron Gouraud, whom a lackey was carrying oﬀ in his fur cloak, found a last word of praise for Renée’s Tahitian costume.
Meanwhile, Monsieur Toutin-Laroche shook Saccard’s hand. ‘Maxime is counting on you,’ said the latter.
‘Quite so,’ replied the new senator. Turning to Renée, he said:
  ‘Madame, I forgot to congratulate you. So the dear boy is ﬁxed up now!’
As she smiled in surprise, Saccard said:
  ‘My wife doesn’t know yet. This evening we decided on the marriage between Mademoiselle de Mareuil and Maxime.’
  She continued smiling, bowing to Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, who went oﬀ saying:
  ‘You’re signing the contract on Sunday, I gather? I’m going to Nevers on some mining business, but I’ll be back in time.’
  Renée remained alone for a moment in the middle of the hall. She had lost her smile; and as what she had just been told sank in, she began to tremble. She stared at the red velvet hangings, the rare plants, the majolica vases. Then she said out loud:
‘I must speak to him.’
  She returned to the drawing room. But she could not enter. A ﬁgure of the cotillon barred the way. The band was playing a soft waltz movement. The ladies, holding each other by the hand, formed a ring like one of those rings of little girls singing ‘Giroﬂé giroﬂa’;
  

and they danced round as quickly as possible, pulling at each other’s arms, laughing, gliding. In the middle a gentleman – it was the mischievous Mr Simpson – held a long pink scarf; he raised it aloft, like a ﬁsherman about to cast his net; but he was in no hurry, seeming to think it amusing to let the ladies dance round and tire themselves out. They panted and begged for mercy. Then he threw the scarf, with such skill that it wound round the shoulders of Madame d’Espanet and Madame Haﬀner, who were dancing side by side. It was one of the American’s jokes. Next he wanted to waltz with both ladies at once, and he had already taken the two of them by the waist, one with his left arm and the other with his right, when Monsieur de Saﬀré said, in his stern voice as cotillon-king:
‘You can’t dance with two ladies.’
  But Mr Simpson refused to let go of the two waists. Adeline and Suzanne threw themselves backwards in his arms, laughing. The point was argued, the ladies grew angry, the uproar was prolonged, and the dress-coats in the window recesses wondered how de Saﬀré proposed to extricate himself creditably from this dilemma. For a moment he seemed perplexed. Then he smiled, took Madame d’Espanet and Madame Haﬀner by the hand, whispered a question  in their ears, received their reply, and then, addressing Mr Simpson, asked:
‘Do you pick verbena or periwinkle?’
  Mr Simpson, looking rather foolish, said that he picked verbena. Whereupon Monsieur de Saﬀré handed him the Marquise, saying:
‘Here’s your verbena.’
  There was discreet applause. They thought this very skilful. Monsieur de Saﬀré was a cotillon-leader who was never at a loss, so the ladies said. Meanwhile the band, reinvigorated, had resumed   the waltz air, and Mr Simpson, after dancing round the room with Madame d’Espanet, led her back to her seat.
  Renée was able to come in. She had bitten her lips till the blood came at the sight of all this nonsense. She thought these men and women stupid to throw scarves about and call themselves by the names of plants. Her ears rang, a furious impatience gave her a sudden desire to throw herself headlong into the crowd and force her way through it. She crossed the drawing room quickly, bumping into the couples returning belatedly to their seats. She went straight to  the hothouse. She had seen neither Louise nor Maxime among the
  
dancers, and thought that they must be there, in some nook of foliage, brought together by the instinct for fun and mischief that made them seek out little corners as soon as they found themselves anywhere together. But she explored the dim hothouse in vain. She only saw, behind an arbour, a tall young man kissing little Madame Daste’s hands, and murmuring:
‘Madame de Lauwerens was right: you’re an angel!’
  This declaration made in her house, in her hothouse, shocked her. Really, Madame de Lauwerens ought to have taken her business elsewhere! Renée would have felt relieved had she been able to turn out of her rooms all these people who were shouting so loudly. Standing before the tank, she looked at the water, wondering where Louise and Maxime could be. The band was still playing the same waltz, whose slow, lilting tune made her feel sick. It was unbearable, not to be able to think in one’s own house. She became confused. She forgot that the young people were not married yet, and she said to herself that no doubt they had gone to bed. Then she thought of the dining room, and quickly ran up the hothouse steps. But, at the door of the ballroom, she was again stopped by a ﬁgure of the cotillon.
  ‘This is the “Dark Spots”, Mesdames,’ said Monsieur de Saﬀré. ‘It’s my own invention, and you will be the ﬁrst to admire it.’
  There was much laughter. The men explained the allusion to the ladies. The Emperor had just made a speech in which he had  referred to the presence of certain dark spots on the horizon. These dark spots, for no apparent reason, had had a great success. The Parisian wits had appropriated the expression to such an extent that for the past week the dark spots had been applied to everything. Monsieur de Saﬀré placed the gentlemen at one end of the room, making them turn their backs to the ladies, who were left at the other end. Then he ordered them to pull up their coats so as to hide the backs of their heads. This performance was gone through amid wild merriment. Hunchbacked, their shoulders screwed up,  their  coat tails falling no lower than their waists, the gentlemen looked quite hideous.
  ‘Don’t laugh, Mesdames,’ cried Monsieur de Saﬀré, with mock seriousness, ‘or I’ll make you put your skirts over your heads.’
  The gaiety increased. He made the most of his authority with some of the gentlemen who refused to conceal the backs of their heads.
  

  ‘You are “dark spots”,’ he said, ‘hide your heads, just show your backs, the ladies must see nothing but black. Now walk about, mingle, so that you can’t be recognized.’
  The hilarity was at its peak. The dark spots walked up and down, on their thin legs, swaying like headless crows. One gentleman’s shirt showed, with braces. The ladies begged for mercy, they were dying with laughter, and Monsieur de Saﬀré graciously ordered them to go and fetch the ‘dark spots’. They ﬂew oﬀ, like a covey of partridges, with a loud rustle of skirts. Then, at the end of her run, each seized hold of the gentleman nearest to her. There was total chaos. One after the other the couples disengaged themselves and waltzed round the room to the louder strains of the band.
  Renée leant against the wall. She looked on, pale, with pursed lips. An old gentleman came up to her to ask why she was not dancing. She had to smile and say something. She made her escape, and entered the supper room. It was empty. Amid the pillaged side-boards, the bottles and plates left lying about, Maxime and Louise sat quietly having supper at one end of the table, side by side, on a napkin they had spread out between them. They looked quite at home, laughing amid the disorder, the dirty plates, the greasy dishes, the still warm remnants of the gluttony of the white-gloved supper-eaters. They had simply brushed away the crumbs around them. Baptiste stalked solemnly round the table, without a glance at the room, which looked as if it had been attacked by a pack of wolves; he waited for the servants to come and restore a semblance of order to the sideboards.
  Maxime had succeeded in putting a ﬁne supper together. Louise adored nougat aux pistaches, a plate of which had remained intact on the top of a sideboard. In front of them were three partly emptied bottles of champagne.
‘Perhaps Papa has gone,’ said the girl.
‘So much the better!’ replied Maxime. ‘I’ll see you home.’ As she laughed, he added:
  ‘You know, they’ve made up their minds that I’m to marry you. It’s not a joke any more, it’s serious. What are we going to do when we get married?’
‘We’ll do what everybody else does, of course!’
  This joke slipped out rather quickly; she added immediately, as if to cancel it:
  
   ‘We’ll go to Italy. It will be good for my chest, I’m very ill... Ah, my poor Maxime, what a funny wife you’ll have! I’m no fatter than a slither of butter.’
  She smiled, with a touch of sadness, in her page’s costume. A dry cough brought a sudden ﬂush to her cheeks.
  ‘It’s the nougat,’ she said. ‘I’m not allowed to eat it at home. Pass me the plate, I’ll put the rest in my pocket.’
  She was emptying the plate when Renée entered. She went straight up to Maxime, making an enormous eﬀort not to curse, and not to strike the hunchback sitting at table with her lover.
‘I must talk to you,’ she stammered in a husky voice. He hesitated, alarmed, afraid to be alone with her. ‘Alone, and straight away,’ repeated Renée.
  ‘Why don’t you go, Maxime?’ said Louise, with her inscrutable look. ‘And at the same time you might try to ﬁnd out what’s become of my father. I lose him at every party we go to.’
  He stood up, and then tried to stop Renée in the middle of the supper room, asking her what she needed to discuss so urgently. But she rejoined between her teeth:
‘Follow me, or I’ll speak out in front of everybody!’
  He turned very pale, and followed her with the docility of a beaten animal. She thought Baptiste was staring at her; but at this moment she no longer cared. At the door the cotillon detained her a third time.
‘Wait,’ she muttered. ‘These idiots will never ﬁnish.’ She took him by the hand, lest he should try to escape.
  Monsieur de Saﬀré was positioning the Duc de Rozan against the wall, in a corner of the room next to the door to the dining room. He put a lady in front of him, then a gentleman back to back with the lady, then another lady facing the gentleman, and so on in a line, couple by couple, like a long snake. As the ladies dawdled and talked, he cried:
‘Come along, Mesdames! Take your places for the “Columns”.’
  The ‘columns’ were formed. The indecency of ﬁnding themselves caught like this, squeezed in between two men, leaning against the back of one and feeling the chest of the other in front, made the ladies giggle. Their breasts pressed against the lapels of the dress-coats, the gentlemen’s legs disappeared in the ladies’ skirts, and when a sudden outburst of merriment made a head lean forward, the
  

moustachios in front were obliged to draw back so as to avoid kissing. At one point a prankster must have given a slight push, for the line closed up, the men plunged deeper into the skirts; there were little cries and endless laughs. Baroness de Meinhold was heard to say: ‘Monsieur, you’re smothering me; don’t squeeze so hard!’, and this seemed so amusing, and provoked such a ﬁt of hilarity in the whole row, that the columns tottered, staggered, collided, and leant against each other to avoid falling. Monsieur de Saﬀré waited with raised hands, ready to clap. Then he clapped. At this signal, suddenly, they all turned round. The couples who found themselves face to face clasped waists, and the column dispersed its chaplet of dancers into the room. None remained but the poor Duc de Rozan, who, as he turned round, found himself stuck with his nose against the wall. They all laughed.
‘Come on,’ Renée said to Maxime.
  The band was still playing the waltz. This soft music, whose monotonous rhythm was becoming rather tiresome, increased Renée’s exasperation. She reached the little drawing room, holding Maxime by the hand; and pushing him up the staircase that led to  the dressing room, she ordered:
‘Go up.’
  She followed. At this moment Madame Sidonie, who had been prowling after her sister-in-law all evening, surprised at her continual wanderings through the rooms, reached the hothouse steps. She saw a man’s legs disappearing into the darkness of the little staircase. A pale smile lit up her waxen face, and lifting her sorceress’s dress so as to go quicker, she hunted for her brother, bumping into a ﬁgure of the cotillon and questioning the servants she met on her way. At last she found Saccard with Monsieur de Mareuil in a room next to the dining room, which had been ﬁtted up as a temporary smoking room. The two fathers were discussing the contract.  But when his sister came up and whispered in his ear, Saccard rose, apologized, and disappeared.
  Upstairs, the dressing room was in complete disorder. On the chairs trailed Echo’s costume, the torn tights, odds and ends of crumpled lace, underclothing thrown aside in a heap, everything a woman in a hurry leaves behind her. The little ivory and silver accessories lay everywhere: there were brushes and nail-ﬁles that had fallen on the carpet; and the towels, still damp, the cakes of soap
  
forgotten on the marble slab, the scent bottles left unstoppered gave  a pungent odour to the ﬂesh-coloured tent. Renée, to remove the white from her arms and shoulders, had used the pink marble bath, after the tableaux vivants. Iridescent soap stains ﬂoated on the surface of the cold water.
  Maxime stepped on a corset, almost fell, and tried to laugh. But he shuddered at the sight of Renée’s grim face. She came up to him, pushed him, and said in a low voice:
‘So you’re going to marry the hunchback?’ ‘No,’ he murmured. ‘Who told you that?’ ‘Oh, don’t tell lies. There’s no point.’
  He suddenly became deﬁant. She alarmed him, he wanted to have done with her.
  ‘Well, yes, I am going to marry her. So what? Can’t I do what I want?’
  She came up to him, her head slightly lowered, and with a wicked laugh grabbed his wrists:
  ‘What you want? You know better than that. I’m your master. I could break your arms if I wanted to; you’re no stronger than a girl.’
  As he struggled, she twisted his arms with all the nervous violence of her anger. He uttered a faint cry. Then she let go and continued:
‘You see? We’d better not ﬁght; I’d only beat you.’
  He remained very pale, with the shame of the pain he felt in his wrists. He watched her pacing up and down in the dressing room. She pushed back the furniture, thinking, ﬁxing on the plan she had been turning over in her mind since her husband had told her of the marriage.
  ‘I’ll lock you in here,’ she said at last, ‘and as soon as it’s daylight we’ll leave for Le Havre.’
He became even paler with alarm and disbelief:
  ‘This is madness!’ he cried. ‘We can’t run away. You’re oﬀ your head.’
  ‘Very likely. In any case it’s you and your father who have driven me mad. I want you, and I mean to have you. Too bad for those fools!’
  A red glow appeared in her eyes. She continued, approaching Maxime once more, scorching his face with her breath:
  ‘What do you think would happen to me if you married the hunchback? You would both laugh at me, perhaps I would have to
  

take back that fool de Mussy, who leaves me utterly cold. When people have done what you and I have done, they stick to each other. Besides, it’s quite obvious. I’m bored without you, and since I’m going away, I’ll take you with me. You can tell Céleste what you want her to fetch from your place.’
Maxime held out his hands, beseeching her:
  ‘Please, Renée, don’t be silly. Pull yourself together. Just think of the scandal.’
  ‘I don’t care about the scandal! If you refuse, I’ll go down to the drawing room and shout out that I’ve slept with you and that you’re cowardly enough now to marry this hunchback.’
  He lowered his head, listened to her, already giving in, accepting this will that thrust itself so rudely upon him.
  ‘We’ll go to Le Havre,’ she resumed in a quieter voice, ‘and from there we’ll go across to England. Nobody will bother us again. If that’s not far enough away, we’ll go to America. I’m always so cold, I’d be better oﬀ there. I’ve often envied the Creoles.’
  But hearing her elaborating her plan, Maxime was again seized with terror. To leave Paris, to go so far away with a woman who was undoubtedly mad, to leave behind a scandal that would exile him forever! It was as if he were being suﬀocated by a hideous nightmare. He sought desperately for a means of escape from this dressing room, from this pink retreat where the passing bell at Charenton seemed to be tolling. He thought he had hit on something.
  ‘But I have no money,’ he said gently, so as not to exasperate her. ‘If you lock me in, I can’t get any.’
  ‘I have,’ she replied triumphantly. ‘I’ve got a hundred thousand francs. It’s all working out extremely well.’
  She took from the looking-glass wardrobe the deed of transfer, which her husband had left with her in the vague hope that she  might lose her senses. She placed it on the dressing table, ordered Maxime to give her a pen and ink from the bedroom, and pushing back the soap-dishes, said as she signed the deed:
  ‘There, I’ve done it. If I’ve been robbed, it’s because I’ve chosen to be. We’ll call on Larsonneau on the way to the station. Now, my little Maxime, I’m going to lock you in, and we’ll escape through the garden when I’ve turned all these people out of the house. We don’t even need to take any luggage.’
Her high spirits had returned. Her mad plan delighted her. It was

a piece of supreme eccentricity, a dramatic ﬁnale, which, in her feverish state, seemed to her quite inspired. It far surpassed her desire to travel in a balloon. She took Maxime in her arms, murmuring:
  ‘My poor darling, did I hurt you just now? You see, you refused. But you’ll see how nice it will be. Could your hunchback ever love you as I do? She’s not a woman, that creature...’
  She laughed, drew him to her, and kissed him on the lips, when a sound made them both turn round. Saccard was standing in the doorway.
  There was a terrible silence. Slowly, Renée removed her arms from Maxime’s neck; she did not lower her head, but stared at her husband with wide, unblinking eyes like those of a corpse; the young man, dumbfounded and terriﬁed, staggered forward now that he was no longer held in her embrace. Stunned by this ﬁnal blow, which at last made the husband and father cry out in him, Saccard stood where he was, livid, his eyes burning into them from a distance. In the moist, fragrant atmosphere of the room, the three candles ﬂared very high, their ﬂames straight, with the immobility of ﬁery tears. The only thing that broke the terrible silence was a breath of music that ﬂoated up the narrow staircase: the waltz, with its serpentine modulations, glided, coiled, died away on the snow-white carpet, among the split tights and the skirts that had fallen on the ﬂoor.
  Then the husband stepped forward. His face was red with rage, he clenched his ﬁsts to strike the guilty pair. His anger burst forth like gunﬁre. He gave a strangled laugh, and coming closer, said:
‘You were announcing your marriage to her, I suppose?’ Maxime retreated, leaning against the wall.
‘Listen,’ he stammered, ‘it was her...’
  He was about to accuse her like a coward, to lay the blame on  her, to say that she wanted to carry him oﬀ, to defend himself with the meekness and trepidation of a child caught in the act. But he was too weak, the words died in his throat. Renée remained as stiﬀ as       a statue, retaining her mute air of deﬁance. Then Saccard, no doubt hoping to ﬁnd a weapon, glanced round the room. On the corner     of the dressing table, among the combs and nail-brushes, he caught sight of the deed of transfer, whose stamped yellow paper stood    out on the white marble. He looked at the deed, then at the guilty pair. Leaning forward, he saw that the deed was signed. His eyes
  

went from the open inkstand to the pen, still wet, lying next to the candlestick. He stood gazing at the signature.
  The silence seemed to increase, the ﬂames of the candles grew longer, the waltz passed even more liltingly along the hangings. Saccard gave an imperceptible shrug. He threw another piercing look at his wife and son, as if to wring from their faces an explanation he was unable to supply. Then he slowly folded the deed and put it in the pocket of his dress-coat. His cheeks had become quite pale.
  ‘You did well to sign, my dear,’ he said quietly to his wife. ‘A hundred thousand francs in cash. I’ll give it to you this evening.’
  He almost smiled, but his hands still trembled. He took one or two steps forward, and added:
  ‘It’s stiﬂing in here. What an idea to come and hatch one of your jokes in this steam-bath!’
  Turning to Maxime, who had raised his head, surprised at his father’s conciliatory tone, he said:
  ‘Come downstairs, you! I saw you come up. I came to fetch you to say goodnight to Monsieur de Mareuil and his daughter.’
  The two men went downstairs, talking. Renée stood alone in the middle of the dressing room, staring at the gaping well of the staircase, down which she had just watched the father and son disappear. She could not take her eyes away from the well. They had gone oﬀ quietly, amicably! These two men had not set upon each other. She strained her ears to hear whether they were not rolling down the stairs, locked together in some terrible struggle. But she could hear nothing, in the darkness, but the sound of dancing, a long lullaby. She thought she could hear in the distance the Marquise’s laugh and Monsieur de Saﬀré’  s voice. So the drama was ended! Her crime, the kisses on the great grey-and-pink bed, the wild nights in the hothouse, the forbidden love that had consumed her for months,   had culminated in this cheap, banal ending. Her husband knew everything and did not even strike her. The silence around her, the silence through which trailed the never-ending waltz, frightened her more than the sound of a murder. She felt afraid of this tranquillity, afraid of this delicate, discreet dressing room, ﬁlled with the fragrance of love.
  She saw herself in the high wardrobe mirror. She moved closer, surprised at her own image, forgetting her husband, forgetting Maxime, quite taken up with the strange woman she saw before her.
  
Madness rose to her brain. Her yellow hair, caught at the temples  and on her neck, seemed to her a naked obscenity. The line in her forehead deepened to such a degree that it formed a dark bar above her eyes, the thin blue scar of a lash from a whip. Who had marked her like that? Her husband had not so much as raised his hand. Her lips surprised her with their pallor, her short-sighted eyes seemed dead. How old she looked! She looked down, and when she saw herself in her tights, and in her light gauze blouse, she gazed at herself with lowered eyes and sudden blushes. Who had stripped her naked? What was she doing there, bare-breasted, like a prostitute displaying herself almost to the waist? She no longer knew. She looked at her thighs, rounded out by the tights; at her hips, whose supple outlines she could see under the gauze; at her breasts, barely covered. She was ashamed of herself, and contempt for her body ﬁlled her with mute anger at those who had left her like this, with mere bangles of gold at her wrists and ankles to cover her skin.
  Then, trying to remember what she was doing there, quite naked, before the mirror, her thoughts ﬂashed back to her childhood, and she saw herself again at the age of seven in the solemn gloom of the Hôtel Béraud. She recalled a day when Aunt Élisabeth had dressed them, Christine and her, in frocks of grey homespun with little red checks. It was Christmas. How pleased they had been with these two dresses, just alike! Their aunt spoiled them, and she went so far as to give them each a coral bracelet and necklace. The sleeves were long, the bodices came up to their chins, and the trinkets showed up on the stuﬀ, and they thought it very pretty. Renée remembered too that   her father was there, that he smiled in his sad way. That day she and her sister had walked up and down the children’s room like grown-ups, without playing, so as not to get dirty. Then, at the Sisters of the Visitation, her schoolfriends had laughed at her about ‘her clown’s dress’, which came down to her ﬁngertips and up over her ears. She had begun to cry during lesson-time. At playtime, to stop them making fun of her, she had turned up the sleeves and tucked in the neckband of the bodice. The bracelet and necklace seemed to her to look prettier on her bare neck and arm. Was that when she had ﬁrst begun to strip naked?
  Her life unfurled before her. She recalled her growing alarm, the cacophony of gold and ﬂesh rising within her, at ﬁrst coming up to her knees, then to her belly, then to her lips; and now she felt it
  

submerging her, pounding on her skull. It was like a poisonous sap:  it had weakened her limbs, grafted growths of shameful aﬀection on her heart, made sickly, bestial caprices sprout in her brain. This sap had soaked into her feet on the rug of her barouche, on other carpets too, on all the silk and velvet on which she had been walking since her marriage. The footsteps of others must have left behind those poisonous seeds, which were now germinating in her blood and circulating in her veins. She clearly remembered her childhood. When she was little, she had been extremely inquisitive. Even later, after the rape, which had plunged her into wickedness, she had not wished for all that shame. She would certainly have become better if she had stayed knitting by Aunt Élizabeth’s side. She heard the regular clicking of her aunt’s needles, while she stood staring into the mirror to read the peaceful future that had eluded her. But she saw only her pink thighs, her pink hips, that strange, pink silk woman standing before her, whose skin of ﬁne, closely woven silk seemed made for lovers’ of dolls and puppets. She had come to that, to being a big doll from whose broken chest escaped a thin trickle of sawdust. Then, at the thought of the enormities of her life, the blood of her father, the bourgeois blood that had always tormented her at critical moments, cried out within her. She, who had always trembled at the thought of hell, ought to have spent her life buried in the austere gloom of the Hôtel Béraud. Who, then, had stripped her naked?
  In the dim blue reﬂection of the glass she imagined she saw the ﬁgures of Saccard and Maxime rise up. Saccard, swarthy, grinning, iron-hued, with his cruel laugh and skinny legs. The strength of the man’s will! For ten years she had seen him at the forge, amid the sparks of red-hot metal, his ﬂesh scorched, breathless, pounding away, lifting hammers twenty times too heavy for his arms, at the risk of crushing himself. She understood him now; he seemed to her to have grown taller through his superhuman eﬀorts, his stupendous roguery, his obsession with money. She remembered how he leapt over obstacles, rolling in the mud, not bothering to wipe himself down, so that he could reach his goal more quickly, not even stopping to enjoy himself on the way, chewing on his twenty-franc pieces as he ran. Then Maxime’s pretty, fair-haired head appeared behind his father’s shoulder: he had his prostitute’s smile, his vacant, lascivious eyes, which were never lowered, his centre parting, which showed the whiteness of his skull. He laughed at Saccard, upon
  
whom he looked down for taking so much trouble to make the money which he, Maxime, spent with such adorable ease. He was like a kept woman. His soft, slender hands bore witness to his vices. His smooth body had the languid attitude of satiated desire. In all his soft, feeble person, through which vice coursed gently like warm water, there shone not even a gleam of the curiosity of sin. He was a passive agent. Renée, as she looked at these two apparitions emerging from the faint shadows of the mirror, stepped back, saw that Saccard had used her like a stake, like an investment, and that Maxime had happened to be there to pick up the louis fallen from the gambler’s pocket. She was an asset in her husband’s portfolio; he urged her to buy gowns for an evening, to take lovers for a season; he wrought her in the ﬂames of his forge, using her as a precious metal with which to gild the iron of his hands. So, little by little, the father had driven her to such a pitch of madness and abandonment as to desire the kisses of the son. If Maxime was the impoverished blood of Saccard, she felt that she was the product, the maggot-eaten fruit of the two men, the pit of infamy they had dug between them, and into which they now both rolled.
  She knew now. It was they who had stripped her naked. Saccard had unhooked her bodice, and Maxime had pulled down her skirt. Then, between them, they had torn oﬀ her shift. Now she stood  there without a rag, with gold bracelets, like a slave. They had looked upon her only a moment ago, and they had not said: ‘You are naked.’ The son had trembled like a coward, shuddering at the thought of pursuing his crime to its conclusion, refusing to follow her in her passion. The father, instead of killing her, had robbed her; this man punished people by riﬂing their pockets: a signature had fallen like a ray of sunshine into the depths of his anger, and by way of vengeance he had carried oﬀ the signature. Then she had seen them walk down the stairs and disappear into the darkness. No blood on the carpet, not a cry, not a moan. They were cowards. They had stripped her naked.
  She recalled how, on one single occasion, she had read the future, on the day when, close to the murmuring shadows of the Parc Monceau, the thought that her husband would corrupt her and one day drive her mad had come to her and disturbed her growing desires. How her poor head hurt! She realized now the folly of the illusion that had made her believe that she lived with impunity in a
  

blissful world of divine pleasure! She had lived in the land of shame, and she was punished by the desertion of her whole body, by the annihilation of her whole being, now in its death-throes. She wept at not having listened to the voices of the trees.
  Her nudity irritated her. She turned her head and looked around. The dressing room still had its heavy odour of musk, its warm silence, broken by the phrases of the waltz, like the last ripples on a pool of water. The faint laughter of distant voluptuousness passed over her with unbearable irony. She held her hands over her ears so as not to hear it. Then she saw clearly the luxury of the room. She looked up at the pink tent, the silver crown that showed a plump Cupid preparing his dart; she gazed at the furniture, at the marble slab of the dressing table, heaped high with pots and implements  that now meant nothing to her; she went up to the bath still full of stagnant water; she kicked away the things that trailed down from the white satin of the easy chairs, Echo’s costume, petticoats, stray towels. From all these things feelings of shame arose: Echo’s dress reminded her of the dumb-show she had acquiesced in for the eccentricity of oﬀering herself to Maxime in public; the bath exhaled the scent of her body, the water in which she had soaked ﬁlling the room with the feverishness of a sick woman; the table with its soap dishes and cosmetics, the furniture with its bed-like fullness bore the crude insignia of her body, of her aﬀairs, of all the ﬁlth she longed to forget. She moved back to the middle of the room, her face crimson, not knowing how she could ﬂee from this alcove perfume, this pink display of luxury, ﬂaunting itself with the shamelessness of a prostitute. The room was as naked as she was: the pink bath, the pink skin of the hangings, the pink marble of the two tables took on a life of their own, coiled up, surrounding her with such an orgy of lust that she closed her eyes and bowed her head, crushed and overwhelmed beneath the lace of the walls and the ceiling.
  But in the darkness she again saw the ﬂesh-coloured stain of the dressing room, and she perceived too the soft grey of the bedroom, the soft gold of the little drawing room, and the hard green of the hothouse, all this complicitous luxury. It was there that her feet had been impregnated with the poisonous sap. She would never have  slept with Maxime in a garret. It would have been too cheap. Silk had given her crime a coquettish quality. She imagined tearing down the lace, spitting on the silk, kicking her great bed to pieces, dragging
  
her luxury into some gutter from where it would emerge worn out and dirty like herself.
  When she opened her eyes again, she approached the mirror and examined herself closely. It was all over. She saw herself dead. Every feature told her that the destruction of her brain was nearly complete. Maxime, the last perversion of her senses, had ﬁnished his work, exhausted her body, unhinged her mind. No joys remained for her to taste, no hope of reawakening. This thought enraged her. In a ﬁnal access of desire, she dreamt of recapturing her prey, of swooning in Maxime’s arms and carrying him oﬀ with her. Louise could never marry him; Louise well knew that he did not belong to her, since she had seen them kissing each other on the lips. Then she threw a fur pelisse over her shoulders, so as not to walk naked through the ball. She went downstairs.
  In the little drawing room she came face to face with Madame Sidonie. The latter, in order to enjoy the drama, had again stationed herself on the hothouse steps. She did not know what to make of Saccard’s reappearance with Maxime, nor of his curt replies to her whispered questions. Then she guessed the truth. Her sallow face turned pale, she thought this was really too much. She went and glued her ear to the door of the staircase, hoping to hear Renée crying upstairs. When Renée opened the door, it almost struck her sister-in-law in the face.
‘You’re spying on me!’ said Renée angrily. Madame Sidonie replied with ﬁne disdain:
‘Do you think I care about your ﬁlthy aﬀairs?’
  Catching up her sorceress’s dress, retreating with a majestic look, she said:
  ‘It’s not my fault, my dear, if things go wrong. I bear you no ill will, you know. You could have had and could still have a second mother in me. I’d be glad to see you whenever you wish.’
  Renée did not listen. She entered the big drawing room and walked through a very complicated ﬁgure of the cotillon without even noticing the surprise occasioned by her fur pelisse. In the middle of the room were groups of ladies and their partners mingling together, waving streamers, and Monsieur de Saﬀré’  s ﬂuty voice was calling out:
  ‘Now, Mesdames, it’s time for the “Mexican War”. The ladies who play the bushes must spread out their skirts and stay crouched.
  

The gentlemen must dance round the bushes. When I clap my hands each of them must waltz with his bush.’
  He clapped his hands. The brass resounded, the waltz sent the couples spinning once more round the room. The ﬁgure was not  very successful. Two ladies had been left behind on the carpet, entangled in their dresses. Madame Daste declared that the only thing she liked in the ‘Mexican War’ was making a ‘cheese’ with her dress, as at school.
  Renée, reaching the hall, bumped into Louise and her father, whom Saccard and Maxime were seeing oﬀ. Baron Gouraud had left. Madame Sidonie went with Mignon and Charrier, while Monsieur Hupel de la Noue escorted Madame Michelin, followed discreetly by her husband. The Prefect had spent the latter part of  the evening paying court to the pretty brunette. He had just succeeded in persuading her to spend one of the summer months in his departmental town, ‘where she would see some really fascinating antiquities’.
  Louise, who was covertly munching the nougat she had put in her pocket, was seized with a coughing ﬁt just as she was leaving.
‘Wrap yourself up,’ said her father.
  Maxime quickly tightened the strings of the hood of her opera cloak. She lifted her chin and let herself be muﬄed up. When Madame Saccard appeared, Monsieur de Mareuil turned back to say goodbye. They all stayed talking for a moment. Renée, to explain her pallor and her shivering, said she had felt cold and had gone up to her room to put the fur over her shoulders. She was waiting for the moment when she could talk to Louise, who was looking at her calmly. When the gentlemen shook hands once more, she leant forward and murmured:
  ‘Tell me, you’re not going to marry him? It’s not possible. You know quite well...’
The child interrupted her, rising on tiptoe to speak in her ear:   ‘Oh! Don’t worry. I’ll take him away. It won’t make any diﬀerence,
since we’re going to Italy.’
  She smiled her vague, vicious, sphinx-like smile. Renée was speechless. She did not understand, she had the impression that the hunchback was making fun of her. Then, when the de Mareuils had gone, after repeating several times ‘See you on Sunday!’, she looked at her husband and at Maxime with frightened eyes. Seeing their
  
complacent, self-satisﬁed attitudes, she hid her face in her hands and
ﬂed, seeking refuge in the depths of the hothouse.
  The pathways were deserted. The great clumps of foliage were asleep, and on the heavy surface of the tank two budding water-lilies were slowly opening. Renée would gladly have sought relief in tears; but this moist heat, this pungent odour, which she recognized, stuck in her throat and strangled her despair. She looked down at the spot in the yellow sand at her feet, on the edge of the tank, where the previous winter she used to spread out the bearskin rug. When she looked up, she saw yet another ﬁgure of the cotillon in the distance, through the two open doors.
  The noise was deafening, there was a confused mêlée in which at ﬁrst she could make out nothing but ﬂying skirts and prancing black legs.  Monsieur de  Saﬀré’  s  voice  cried,  ‘Change  your  partners! Change your partners!’ The couples passed by amid a ﬁne yellow dust; each gentleman, after three or four turns in the waltz, threw his partner into the arms of his neighbour, who in turn threw him his. Baroness de Meinhold, in her costume as the Emerald, fell from the hands of the Comte de Chibray into the hands of Mr Simpson; he caught her as best he could by the shoulder, while the tips of his gloves glided under her bodice. The Comtesse Vanska, ﬂushed, jingling her coral pendants, went with a bound from the chest of Monsieur de Saﬀré to the chest of the Duc de Rozan, whom she entwined in her arms and compelled to hop round for ﬁve turns, when she hung onto the hips of Mr Simpson, who had just ﬂung the Emerald to the leader of the cotillon. Madame Teissière, Madame Daste, and Madame de Lauwerens shone like large, live jewels, with the blond pallor of the Topaz, the blue of the Turquoise, and the bright blue of the Sapphire; they had moments of abandonment, curved under a waltzer’s outstretched wrist, then set oﬀ again, fell backwards or forwards into a fresh embrace, found themselves successively in the arms of every man in the room. However, Madame d’Espanet, standing in front of the band, had succeeded in catching hold of Madame Haﬀner as she sped by, and now waltzed with her, refusing to let her go. Gold and Silver danced lovingly together.
  Renée suddenly understood this whirling of skirts, this prancing  of legs. Standing lower down, she could see the frenzied movement of the feet, the blur of glazed shoes and white ankles. At intervals it seemed to her as if a gust of wind was about to blow away the dresses.
  

The bare shoulders, the bare arms, the bare heads that reeled past, caught up, thrown oﬀ, and caught up again at the end of the gallery, where the music of the band grew madder and the red hangings swooned amid the ﬁnal fever of the ball, seemed to her a tumultuous symbol of her life, of her self-exposure, of her wild self-indulgence. At the thought that Maxime, in order to take the hunchback in his arms, had abandoned her there, in the very spot where they had made love, she felt a pang of pain so intense that she thought of plucking a stalk of the tanghin tree that grazed her cheek, and of chewing it dry. But she was afraid, and she remained standing before the shrub, shivering under the fur, which she drew tightly around her in a gesture of terror and shame.



CHAPTER VII

Three months later, on one of those dismal spring mornings, which in Paris recall the greyness and damp of winter, Aristide Saccard got out of a cab in the Place du Château d’Eau and turned with four other gentlemen into the large demolition site that was to become the Boulevard du Prince-Eugène. They formed a committee of inspection sent by the Compensation Authority to value certain houses on the spot, their owners not having been able to come to an agreement with the City.
  Saccard was repeating the stroke of luck of the Rue de la Pépinière. To keep his wife’s name out of it, he began with a spurious sale of the building plots and the music-hall. Larsonneau handed over the lot to an imaginary creditor. The deed of sale bore the colossal ﬁgure of three million francs. This ﬁgure was so outrageous that, when the expropriation agent, in the name of the non-existent landlord, claimed the amount of the purchase money as an indemnity, the committee at the Hôtel de Ville ﬂatly refused to allow more than two million and a half, despite the machinations of Monsieur Michelin and the appeals of Monsieur Toutin-Laroche and Baron Gouraud. Saccard had foreseen this setback; he refused the oﬀer, let the case go before the Commission, of which he happened to be a member together with Monsieur de Mareuil, whose membership was a coincidence to which Saccard had no doubt contributed. It was thus that, with four of his colleagues, he found himself appointed to conduct an inquiry into his own site.
  Monsieur de Mareuil accompanied him. The other three consisted of a doctor, who smoked a cigar without caring the least in the world for the heaps of rubbish he stepped over, and two businessmen, of whom one, a manufacturer of surgical instruments, used to be an itinerant knife-grinder.
  The path these gentlemen followed was dreadful. It had been raining all night. The sodden earth was turning into a river of mud, running between the demolished houses over a track cutting across the soft ground, in which the dobbin-carts sank up to their axles. On either side, great pieces of wall, burst open by pickaxes, remained standing; tall, gutted buildings, displaying their pale insides, opened
  

to the skies their wells stripped of stairs, their gaping rooms suspended in mid-air like the broken drawers of a big, ugly piece of furniture. Nothing could be more forlorn than the wallpaper of these rooms, blue or yellow squares hanging in tatters, marking the positions, ﬁve or six storeys high, right up to the roofs, of wretched little garrets, cramped holes that had once contained, perhaps, a whole human existence. On the bare walls, ribbons of ﬂues rose side by side, lugubriously black and with sharp bends. A forgotten weather-cock grated at the edge of a roof, while loose gutters hung down like rags. The gap yawned still wider in the midst of these ruins, like a breach opened by cannon; the roadway, as yet hardly set out, ﬁlled with rubbish, mounds of earth, and deep puddles, stretched out under the leaden sky, amid the sinister pallor of the falling plaster dust, edged with the black strips of chimneys as with mourning border.
  The gentlemen, with their polished boots, their frock coats, and top hats, struck a strange note in this muddy, dirty yellow landscape, traversed only by sallow workmen, horses splashed to their backs, carts whose sides were hidden beneath a coating of dust. They went in single ﬁle, hopping from stone to stone, avoiding the pools of liquid mire, sometimes sinking in up to their ankles and then cursing as they shook their feet. Saccard had suggested taking the Rue de Charonne, which would have spared them this tramp over rough ground; but unfortunately they had several plots to visit on the long line of the boulevard; they had decided, out of curiosity, to go through the middle of the roadworks. From time to time they stopped, balancing on a piece of plaster that had fallen into a rut, calling to one another to point out some yawning ﬂooring, a ﬂue stuck straight up in the air, a joist that had fallen onto a neighbouring roof. This demolition area at the end of the Rue du Temple fascinated them.
  ‘It’s extraordinary,’ said Monsieur de Mareuil. ‘Saccard, look at that kitchen up there; there’s an old frying pan still hanging over the stove. I can see it quite clearly.’
  The doctor, his cigar between his teeth, had planted himself  before a demolished house of which only the ground-ﬂoor rooms  remained, ﬁlled with the debris of the other storeys. A solitary piece of wall rose from the heap of bricks and rubbish; and in order to pull it down in one go they had tied a rope round it at which some thirty workmen were tugging.
  
   ‘They won’t do it,’ muttered the doctor. ‘They’re pulling too much to the left.’
  The four others retraced their steps to see the wall come down.  All ﬁve of them, with wide eyes and bated breath, waited for the fall with a thrill of pleasure. The workmen, relaxing and then suddenly stiﬀening, cried, ‘Heave ho!’
‘They won’t do it,’ repeated the doctor.
Then, after a few seconds, one of the businessmen said joyously: ‘It’s moving, it’s moving.’
  When the wall at last gave way and came down with a thunderous crash, raising a cloud of plaster, the gentlemen smiled at one another. They were delighted. Their frock coats were covered with a ﬁne dust, which whitened their arms and shoulders.
  They talked about the workmen as they resumed their cautious progress through the puddles. There were not many good ones among them. They were all lazy, spendthrift, and obstinate into the bargain, dreaming only of their employer’s ruin. Monsieur de Mareuil, who for the last minute had been nervously watching two poor devils perched on the corner of a roof hacking at a wall with their pickaxes, expressed the view that they were very courageous all the same. The others stopped again and looked up at the labourers balancing themselves, leaning over, striking with all their might; they shoved the stones down with their feet and calmly watched them break into pieces beneath them: if their pickaxes had gone wide of the mark, the mere momentum of their arms would have hurled  them to the ground.
  ‘Oh, they’re used to it,’ said the doctor, putting his cigar back in his mouth. ‘They’re absolute brutes.’
  They reached one of the houses they had to inspect. They hurried through their task in a quarter of an hour, and resumed their walk. They gradually lost their disgust of the mud; they walked straight through the puddles, giving up all hope of keeping their boots clean. When they passed the Rue Ménilmontant, one of the businessmen, the ex-knife-grinder, became agitated. He gazed at the ruins around him, failing to recognize the neighbourhood. He said he had lived in this area more than thirty years ago, when he had arrived in Paris, and that he would really like to ﬁnd his old place again. He was still looking when the sight of a house which the labourers’ picks had already cut in two made him stop short in the middle of the roadway.
  

He studied the door and the windows. Then, pointing to a corner of the demolished building high above them, he cried:
‘There it is! That’s it!’ ‘What?’ asked the doctor. ‘My room! That’s it!’
  It was on the ﬁfth ﬂoor, a little room that previously must have looked out onto a courtyard. A breach in the wall showed it quite bare, already cut into on one side, with wallpaper with a pattern of big yellow ﬂowers, a broad torn strip of which ﬂuttered in the wind. On the left they could still see a cupboard recess, lined with blue paper, and next to it the aperture for a stovepipe, with a bit of piping left in it.
The ex-workman was overcome with emotion.
  ‘I spent ﬁve years there,’ he murmured. ‘It was hard in those days; but no matter, I was young... You  see the cupboard; that’s where      I put by three hundred francs, sou by sou. And the hole for the stovepipe, I can still remember the day I made it. There was no ﬁreplace, it was bitterly cold, all the more so because I was often on my own.’
  ‘Come, come,’ interrupted the doctor, joking, ‘there’s no need to tell us your secrets. You sowed your wild oats like the rest of us.’
  ‘That’s true,’ ingenuously resumed the ex-knife-grinder. ‘I still remember an ironing girl who lived opposite. The bed was on the right, near the window. Ah, my poor room, look what they’ve done to it!’
He was really very upset.
  ‘Come on,’ said Saccard. ‘There’s nothing wrong with pulling these old hovels down. We’re going to build ﬁne freestone houses in their place. Would you still live in a dump like that? There’s nothing to stop you taking up residence on the new boulevard.’
‘True enough,’ replied the manufacturer, who seemed consoled. The committee of inspection halted again two houses further on.
The doctor stayed outside, smoking, looking at the sky. When they reached the Rue des Amandiers, the houses became more scattered; they now passed through large enclosures, pieces of waste ground scattered with tumbledown shacks. Saccard seemed very pleased by this walk through the demolitions. He had just remembered the dinner he had had with his ﬁrst wife on the Buttes Montmartre, and he clearly recalled how he had pointed out to her, with his hand, the

cutting that went from the Place du Château d’Eau to the Barrière du Trône. The realization of his prophecy delighted him. He followed the cutting with the secret joy of authorship, as though he himself had struck the ﬁrst blows of the pickaxe with his iron ﬁngers. He skipped over the puddles, reﬂecting that three million francs were waiting for him beneath a heap of rubble, at the end of this stream of mire.
  Meanwhile the gentlemen began to fancy themselves in the country. The road passed through gardens, whose separating walls had been pulled down. There were large clumps of budding lilac. The foliage was a very delicate, pale green. Each of these gardens, looking like a hideaway hung with the greenery of the shrubs, was hollowed out with a small pond, a miniature waterfall, bits of wall on which were painted trompe-l’oeil in the form of foreshortened groves and blue landscapes. The buildings, far apart and discreetly hidden,  were like Italian villas and Greek temples: moss was eating away the bottoms of the plaster columns, while lichens had already loosened the mortar of the pediments.
‘Those are “follies”,’ said the doctor with a wink.
  Seeing that the others did not understand him, he explained that under Louis XV the Court nobility kept up houses for their licentious parties. It was the fashion. He added:
  ‘Those places were called their “follies”. The neighbourhood is full of them... There were some ﬁne goings-on here, I can tell you.’
  The committee of inquiry had become very attentive. The two businessmen’s eyes glittered, they smiled and looked with great interest at these gardens, these villas which they had barely graced with a glance before hearing their colleague’s comments. They stood for a long time before a grotto. But when the doctor, seeing a house already attacked by pickaxes, said that he recognized the Comte de Savigny’s ‘folly’, well known for that nobleman’s orgies, the whole committee left the boulevard to go and inspect the ruins. They climbed onto the rubbish heaps, entered the ground-ﬂoor rooms by the windows, and as the workmen were having their lunch, they were able to linger there quite at their ease. They stayed a good half-hour, examining the ceiling roses, the frescos over the door, the tortuous mouldings of the plaster yellowed with age. The doctor reconstructed the house.
‘Look here’, he said, ‘this room must be the banquet hall. There,


in that recess, must have stood a huge divan. And I’m positive there was a mirror over the divan; there are the mirror’s feet... Those devils certainly knew how to enjoy life!’
  They would never have left these ruins, which tickled their curiosity, had not Saccard, becoming impatient, said to them with a laugh: ‘You can look as long as you like, but the ladies are gone. Let’s get
on with our business.’
  Before moving on, the doctor climbed onto a mantelpiece in order to detach, with a delicate blow of the pickaxe, a little painted Cupid’s head, which he put into the pocket of his frock coat.
  They arrived at last at the end of their journey. The land that was formerly Madame Aubertot’s was very extensive; the music-hall and the garden took up barely half of it, the rest had here and there a few nondescript houses. The new boulevard cut diagonally across this huge parallelogram, and this had allayed one of Saccard’s fears: he had long imagined that only a corner of the music-hall would be cut oﬀ. Accordingly Larsonneau had been instructed to talk very big, as the bordering plots ought to increase at least ﬁvefold in value. He was already threatening the City with a recent decree that authorized the landowners to provide no more than the land absolutely necessary for the public works.
  The expropriation agent received them in person. He walked  them through the garden, made them go over the music-hall, showed them a huge bundle of papers. The two businessmen had gone down again, accompanied by the doctor, whom they were still asking about the Comte de Savigny’s folly, which had captured their imaginations. They listened to him open-mouthed, all three standing beside one of the amusement games. He told them about Madame de Pompadour and the aﬀairs of Louis XV, while Monsieur de Mareuil and Saccard continued the inquiry alone.
  ‘We’ve ﬁnished,’ said the latter, returning to the garden. ‘If you will allow me, Messieurs, I’ll draw up the report.’
  The manufacturer of surgical instruments did not even hear. He was deep in the Regency.
  ‘What strange times, all the same!’ he murmured. Then they found a cab in the Rue de Charonne, and drove oﬀ, splashed up to their knees, but as satisﬁed with their walk as if they had had a day in the country. In the cab the conversation changed, they talked politics, they said that the Emperor was doing great things. No one
  
had ever seen the like of what they had just seen. That great, long, straight street would be splendid when the houses were built.
  Saccard drew up the report, and the Authority granted three million francs. The speculator was in dire straits, he could not have waited another month. This money saved him from ruin and even from the dock. He paid ﬁve hundred thousand francs towards the million he owed his upholsterer and his builder for the house in the Parc Monceau. He stopped up other holes, launched new companies, deafened Paris with the sound of the real crown pieces he shovelled out onto the shelves of his iron safe. The golden stream had a source at last. But it was not yet a solid, established fortune, ﬂowing with an even, continuous current. Saccard, saved from a crisis, thought himself a beggar with the crumbs from his three million, and said frankly that he was still too poor, that he could not stop; and soon the ground appeared once more to be giving way under his feet.
  Larsonneau had conducted himself so admirably in the Charonne aﬀair that Saccard, after a brief hesitation, had the honesty to give him his ten per cent and his bonus of thirty thousand francs. The expropriation agent immediately set up a banking house. When his accomplice peevishly accused him of being richer than himself, the yellow-gloved dandy replied with a laugh:
  ‘You see, master, you’re very clever at making the ﬁve-franc pieces rain down, but you don’t know how to pick them up.’
  Madame Sidonie took advantage of her brother’s stroke of luck to borrow ten thousand francs from him, and used them to spend two months in London. She returned without a sou. It was never known where the ten thousand francs had gone.
  ‘Good gracious!’ she replied, when they asked her about it, ‘it all costs money. I ransacked all the libraries. I had three secretaries helping me.’
  When she was asked if she had at last some positive information about the three thousand million, she smiled mysteriously, and muttered:
  ‘You’re a lot of unbelievers... I’ve discovered nothing, but it makes no diﬀerence. You’ll see one of these days.’
  She had not wasted all her time, however, while she was in England. Her brother the minister took advantage of her journey to entrust her with a delicate errand. When she returned she obtained a huge volume of orders from the Ministry. It was a fresh incarnation.
  

She made contracts with the Government, she undertook every imaginable kind of supply. She sold it provisions and arms for the troops, furniture for the prefectures and public departments, ﬁre-wood for the museums and government oﬃces. The money she made did not induce her to change her eternal black dresses, or her dismal, sallow face. Saccard reﬂected that it was indeed she whom he had seen long ago furtively leaving his brother Eugène’s house. She must have kept secretly in touch with him all the time, for reasons unknown to all.
  Amid these interests, these insatiable appetites, Renée suﬀered agonies. Aunt Élisabeth was dead; her sister had married and left the Hôtel Béraud, where her father alone remained in the gloomy shadows of the big rooms. In one season she exhausted her aunt’s inheritance. She had taken to gambling. She had found a house where ladies sat at the card table until three o’clock in the morning, losing hundreds of thousands of francs a night. She made an attempt to drink; but she could not, overcome with disgust. Since she had found herself alone again, she let herself go more than ever, not knowing how to kill time. She tried everything. But nothing appealed to her amid the inﬁnite boredom that engulfed her. She seemed older, she had blue rings round her eyes, her nose became thinner, her lips pouted with sudden, inexplicable laughter. She was breaking down.
  When Maxime had married Louise, and the young couple left for Italy, she no longer troubled herself about her lover, and even seemed to have forgotten him. When, six months later, Maxime returned alone, having buried ‘the hunchback’ in the cemetery of a small town in Lombardy, her feeling towards him was one of hatred. She remembered Phèdre, she doubtless recalled the poisonous love to which she had heard La Ristori lend her sobs. Then, to avoid having the young man in her house in future, to dig an abyss of shame between the father and the son, she forced her husband to acknowledge the incest, telling him that on the day when he had surprised her with Maxime, the latter, who had been running after her for a long time, was trying to rape her. Saccard was terribly annoyed by her persistent desire to open his eyes. He was compelled to break with his son, to stop seeing him. The young widower, rich with his wife’s dowry, took a small house in the Avenue de l’Impératrice, where he lived alone. He gave up the Council of State, he trained
  
racehorses. Renée thus experienced one of her last pleasures. She took her revenge, throwing back in their faces the infamy these two men had set in her; she said to herself that now she would never again see them laughing at her, arm-in-arm, like friends.
  As Renée’s aﬀections crumbled there came a time when she had only her maid left to love. She had gradually developed a maternal fondness for Céleste. Perhaps this girl, who was all that remained to remind her of Maxime’s love, recalled the hours of pleasure forever dead. Perhaps she simply felt touched by the ﬁdelity of this honest soul whose devotion nothing seemed to shake. From the depths of her remorse she thanked her for having witnessed her shame without leaving her in disgust; she pictured self-denials, a whole life of renunciation, before becoming able to understand the calmness of the maidservant in the presence of incest, her icy hands, her respectful and serene attentions; and she was all the happier in the girl’s devotion as she knew her to be virtuous and thrifty, with no lovers and no vices.
Sometimes, in her sadness, she would say to her: ‘Ah, my girl, it will be your duty to close my eyes.’
  Céleste did not reply, and smiled curiously. One morning she quietly told Renée that she was leaving, that she was going back to the country. Renée stood trembling, as if some great misfortune had overtaken her. She plied her with questions. Why was she deserting her when they got on so well together? She oﬀered to double her wages.
  But the maidservant replied no with a gesture, placidly and obstinately.
  ‘Listen, Madame,’ she said ﬁnally, ‘you could oﬀer me all the gold in Peru, I wouldn’t stay a week longer. You really don’t know me. I’ve been with you for eight years, haven’t I? Well, from the ﬁrst day, I said to myself, “As soon as I’ve saved ﬁve thousand francs, I’ll go back home; I’ll buy Lagache’s house, and I’ll live very happily.” It’s something I promised myself, you see. I reached my target yesterday, when you gave me my wages.’
  Renée felt a sudden chill. She saw Céleste moving behind her  and Maxime while they kissed, and she now saw her indiﬀerence, her complete detachment, thinking of  her  ﬁve  thousand  francs.  She made one more attempt to keep her, afraid of the void that threatened her existence, hoping, in spite of everything, to keep by
  

her side this obstinate creature whom she had looked upon as utterly devoted and whom she now discovered to be merely selﬁsh. The girl smiled, still shaking her head, muttering:
  ‘No, no, I can’t do it. I would refuse even if my mother asked me. I’ll buy two cows. I may start a little haberdasher’s shop. It’s very nice in our part of the country. You’d be welcome to come and see me. It’s near Caen. I’ll leave the address.’
  Renée stopped insisting. She wept when she was alone. The next day she decided to take Céleste to the Gare de l’Ouest in her own brougham. She gave her one of her travelling rugs, and some cash, fussed around her like a mother whose daughter is about to set oﬀ on a long journey. In the brougham she looked at her with tears in her eyes. Céleste chatted, saying how pleased she was to be leaving. Then, growing bolder, she spoke out and gave her mistress some advice.
  ‘I would never have behaved as you did, Madame. I often said to myself, when I found you with Monsieur Maxime: “How is it possible to be so foolish about men!” It always ends badly. I’ve always mistrusted them!’
  She laughed, throwing herself back in the corner of the brougham. ‘My money would have disappeared!’ she  continued.  ‘And  at this moment I might have been crying my eyes out. That’s why, whenever I saw a man, I picked up a broomstick. I never dared tell you all this. Besides, it wasn’t my business. You were free to do as you pleased, and I only had to earn my money and behave properly.’
  At the railway station Renée said she would pay her fare, and bought her a ﬁrst-class ticket. As they had arrived early, she kept her talking, took her hands in hers, and repeated:
‘Take care, and look after yourself, my dear.’
  Céleste stood looking happy, with a fresh, smiling face, as her mistress gazed at her with tears in her eyes. Renée again spoke of the past, and suddenly Céleste exclaimed:
  ‘I was forgetting: I never told you about Baptiste... I suppose   they didn’t want to tell you...’
Renée admitted that she did not know to what she was referring. ‘Well, you remember his grand, digniﬁed air and his haughty look;
you remarked on them yourself. All that was play-acting. He didn’t like women, he never came down to the pantry when we were  there;

and, I can tell you now, he even said it was disgusting in the drawing room because of the low-necked dresses. I’m quite sure he didn’t like women!’
  She leant forward and whispered something in Renée’s ears, making her blush.
  ‘When the new stable lad’, she continued, ‘told Monsieur everything, Monsieur preferred to dismiss Baptiste rather than have him prosecuted. It seems that ﬁlthy sort of thing had been going on in the stables for years. And to think that great beanpole pretended to be fond of horses! It was the grooms he was after.’
  The bell interrupted her. She hurriedly caught up the nine or ten packages from which she had refused to be parted. She allowed herself to be kissed. Then she went oﬀ, without looking back.
  Renée remained in the station until the engine whistled. When the train had gone she did not know what to do in her despair; her days seemed to stretch before her as empty as the great hall where she had been left alone. She stepped back into her brougham and told the coachman to drive her home. But on the way she changed her mind; she was afraid of her room, of the boredom awaiting her there; she did not even have the energy to go in and change her dress for her customary drive round the lake. She felt a need for sunlight, for        a crowd.
She ordered the coachman to drive to the Bois.
  It was four o’clock. The Bois was awakening from the drowsiness of the warm afternoon. Clouds of dust ﬂew along the Avenue de l’Impératrice, and one could see in the distance the green expanse between the slopes of Saint-Cloud and Suresnes, crowned by the grey mast of Mont Valérien. The sun, high on the horizon, swept down, ﬁlling the hollows of the foliage with a golden dust, lighting up the tall branches, changing the sea of leaves into a sea of light. But past the fortiﬁcations, in the avenue leading to the lake, the roads had been watered, the carriages rolled over the brown surface as over a carpet, amid a freshness, a rising fragrance of moist earth. On either side the trees of the copses reared their crowd of young trunks amid the low bushes, disappearing in the greenish twilight, which streaks of light pierced here and there with yellow clearings; and as the lake came closer, the chairs on the side paths became more numerous, families sat with quiet, silent faces, watching the endless procession of wheels. Then, on reaching the open space in front of the lake,
  

there was an eﬀulgence; the slanting sun transformed the  round sheet of water into a great mirror of polished silver. Eyes blinked, one could only distinguish on the left, near the bank, the dark patch of the pleasure boat. The sunshades in the carriages leaned with a gentle, uniform movement towards this splendour, and were not raised until they reached the avenue skirting the water, which, from above the bank, now assumed a metallic darkness streaked with burnished gold. On the right, the clumps of ﬁr trees stretched forth  their colonnades of straight, slender stems, whose soft violet tint was reddened by the ﬁery sky; on the left, the lawns, bathed in light, spread out like ﬁelds of emeralds to the distant lacework of the Porte de la Muette. On approaching the waterfall, while the dimness of the copses was renewed on one side, the islands at the far end of the lake rose up against the blue sky, with their sunlit banks, the bold shadows of their pine trees, and the Châlet at their feet, which looked like a child’s toy lost in a virgin forest. The whole park laughed and quivered in the sun.
  Renée felt ashamed, on this splendid day, of her brougham, of her dress of puce-coloured silk. She settled further back in the vehicle, and through the open windows looked out at the ﬂood of light covering the water and the greenery. At the bends of the avenues she caught sight of the line of wheels revolving like golden stars in a long streak of blinding lights. The varnished panels, the gleam of brass and steel, the bright hues of the dresses passed by, to the even trot of the horses, and set against the background of the Bois a wide moving bar, a ray fallen from the sky, stretching out and following the bends of the roadway. In this ray Renée, blinking, saw at intervals a woman’s blond chignon, a footman’s dark back, the white mane of a horse. The rounded sunshades of watered silk shimmered like metallic moons.
  Then, in the presence of this broad daylight, of these sheets of sunshine, she thought of the ﬁne dust of twilight she had seen falling one evening upon the yellow leaves. Maxime was with her. It was at the time when her lust for that child was awakening within her. She saw again the lawns soaked by the evening air, the darkened copses, the deserted pathways. The line of carriages drove then with a mournful sound past the empty chairs, while today the rumble of the wheels, the trot of the horses, sounded with the joyousness of a fanfare of trumpets. Then all her drives in the Bois came back to her.
  
She had lived there, Maxime had grown up there, by her side, on the cushion in her carriage. It was their garden. Rain had surprised them there, sunshine brought them back, night had not always driven them away. They drove there in every kind of weather, they tasted there the disappointments and delights of their life. In the void of her existence, amid the melancholy caused by Céleste’s departure, these memories gave her a bitter joy. Her heart said, ‘Never again! Never again!’ She remained frozen when she evoked the image of that winter landscape, that congealed and dimmed lake on which they had skated; the sky was the colour of soot, the snow had stitched white bands of lace on the trees, the wind blew ﬁne sand into their faces.
  Meanwhile, on the left, on the track reserved for riders, she had recognized the Duc de Rozan, Monsieur de Mussy, and Monsieur de Saﬀré. Larsonneau had killed the duke’s mother by presenting to her, as they fell due, the hundred and ﬁfty thousand francs’-worth of bills accepted by her son, and the duke was running through his second half-million with Blanche Muller after leaving the ﬁrst ﬁve hundred thousand francs in the hands of Laure d’Aurigny. Monsieur de Mussy, who had left the Embassy in London for the Embassy in Rome, had become once more a dashing man of the world; he led the cotillon with renewed grace. As for Monsieur de Saﬀré, he remained the most amiable sceptic in the world. Renée saw him urging his horse towards the carriage door of the Comtesse Vanska, with whom he was said to have been infatuated ever since the day when he had seen her as Coral at the Saccards’.
  All the ladies were there: the Duchesse de Sternich in her eternal chariot, Madame de Lauwerens in a landau, with Baroness de Meinhold and little Madame Daste in front of her; Madame  Teissière and Madame de Guende in a victoria. Among these ladies, Sylvia and Laure d’Aurigny were stretched out on the cushions of a magniﬁcent barouche. Even Madame Michelin passed by, ensconced in a brougham; the pretty brunette had been on a visit to Monsieur Hupel de la Noue’s departmental town, and on her return she had appeared in the Bois in this brougham, to which she hoped soon to add an open carriage. Renée also saw the Marquise d’Espanet and Madame Haﬀner, the inseparables, hidden beneath their sunshades, stretched out side by side, laughing lovingly into each other’s eyes.
Then the gentlemen drove by. Monsieur de Chibray in a drag;


Mr Simpson in a dog cart; Mignon and Charrier, keener than ever  on their work despite their dream of retirement, in a brougham which they left at the corner of the avenues in order to go some of the way on foot; Monsieur de Mareuil, still in mourning for his daughter, looking out for gestures of acknowledgment of his ﬁrst intervention, the day before, at the Corps Législatif, airing his political importance in the carriage of Monsieur Toutin-Laroche, who had once more saved the Crédit Viticole after bringing it to the verge of ruin, and who was being made still thinner and still more imposing by his work at the Senate.
  To close the procession, as a last display of majesty, came Baron Gouraud, lolling in the sun on two pillows. Renée was surprised and disgusted to recognize Baptiste seated by the coachman’s side, with his pale face and solemn air. The tall lackey had taken service with the Baron.
  The copses sped past, the water of the lake became iridescent under the slanting rays of the sun, the line of carriages stretched out with its dancing lights. Renée, caught up and carried away amid all this splendour, was vaguely conscious of these appetites rolling along in the sunlight. She felt no anger towards these devourers of the quarry. But she hated them because of their joyous exultation in the golden dust that fell from the sky. They were gorgeous and smiling; the women were white and plump; the men had the quick glances, the contented air of successful lovers. She, with her empty heart, felt nothing but lassitude and repressed envy. Was she better than others, that she should break down under the weight of pleasure? Or was it the others who were to be praised for being stronger than her? She did not know, she longed for new desires with which to begin life afresh, when, looking round, she noticed beside her, on the side-path at the edge of the coppice, a sight that dealt her a supreme blow.
  Saccard and Maxime were sauntering along, arm-in-arm. The father must have been to see the son, and together they had come down from the Avenue de l’Impératrice to the lake, chatting as they went.
  ‘Listen,’ said Saccard, ‘you’re stupid. A man like you, with money, doesn’t let it lie idle in a drawer. There’s a hundred per cent to be made in the business I’m telling you about. It’s a safe investment. You know very well I wouldn’t let you be taken for a ride.’
  But the young man seemed wearied by this persistence. He smiled in his pretty way, and looked at the carriages.
  
   ‘Look at that little woman over there, the woman in violet,’ he said suddenly. ‘That’s a washer-girl that ass Mussy has brought out.’
  They looked at the woman in violet. Then Saccard took a cigar from his pocket, and turning to Maxime, who was smoking, said:
‘Give me a light.’
  Then they stopped for a moment, facing each other. When the cigar was alight the father continued, once more taking his son’s arm, pressing it tightly under his own:
‘You’d be a fool if you didn’t take my advice. So, do you agree?
Will you bring me the hundred thousand francs tomorrow?’
  ‘You know I don’t come to your house any more,’ replied Maxime, compressing his lips.
‘Bah! Rubbish! It’s time that nonsense stopped!’
  As they took a few steps in silence, at the moment when Renée, feeling about to faint, pressed her head back against the padding of the brougham so as not to be seen, a rumour spread along the line of carriages. The pedestrians on the side-paths halted, turned round open-mouthed. There was a quicker sound of wheels, carriages drew aside respectfully, and two outriders appeared, clad in green, with round caps on which danced golden tassels with their cords out-spread; they trotted on, leaning slightly forward on their large bay horses. Behind them they left an empty space. Then, in this empty space, the Emperor appeared.
  He sat alone on the back seat of a landau. Dressed in black, with his frock coat buttoned up to his chin, he wore, a little to one side, a very tall hat, whose silk glistened in the sunlight. In front of him, on the other seat, sat two gentlemen, dressed with that correct elegance which was in favour at the Tuileries, serious, their hands on their  knees, with the silent air of two wedding guests taken for a drive amid the curiosity of the crowd.
  Renée thought the Emperor had aged. His mouth opened more feebly under his thick waxed moustache. His eyelids fell more heavily, to the point of half covering his lifeless eyes, whose yellow greyness was yet more bleared. His nose alone retained its look of a dry ﬁshbone set in the vagueness of his face.
  In the meantime, while the ladies in the carriages smiled discreetly, the people on foot pointed the sovereign out to one another. A fat man asserted that the Emperor was the gentleman with his  back to the coachman on the left. A few hands were raised in salute.
  

But Saccard, who had taken oﬀ his hat even before the outriders had passed, waited until the Imperial carriage was directly in front of him, and then shouted in his thick Provençal accent:
‘Long live the Emperor!’
  The Emperor, surprised, turned  round,  seemed  to  recognize  the enthusiast, and returned the greeting with a smile.Everything  disappeared in the sunlight, the carriages closed up, Renée could only see, above the manes of the horses, between the lackeys, the outriders’ green caps dancing with their golden tassels.
  She remained for a moment with wide-open eyes, full of this vision, which reminded her of another moment in her life. It seemed to her as if the Emperor, by mingling with the line of carriages, had just set in it the last necessary ray, and given a clear meaning to this triumphal procession. Now it was a gloriﬁcation. All these wheels, all these men with decorations, all these women languidly reclining, vanished into the ﬂash and the rumble of the Imperial landau. This sensation became so acute and so painful that Renée felt a compelling need to escape from this triumph, from Saccard’s cry, still ringing in her ears, from the sight of the father and son sauntering along arm-in-arm. She looked round, her hands folded on her breast, as if burnt with an internal ﬁre; and it was with sudden hope of relief, of healing coolness, that she leant forward and said to the coachman:
‘The Hôtel Béraud.’
  The courtyard retained its cloistral coldness; Renée went round the colonnades, happy in the damp that fell on her shoulders. She approached the tank, green with moss, its edges polished by wear; she looked at the lion’s head half worn away, with gaping jaws, discharging a stream of water through an iron pipe. How often had she and Christine taken this head in their tiny arms to lean forward and reach the stream of water, which they loved to feel ﬂowing cold as ice over their hands. Then she climbed the great silent staircase, and saw her father at the end of the succession of wide rooms; he drew up his tall ﬁgure, and seemed to merge deeper into the shadows of the old house, of the proud solitude in which he had shut himself away since his sister’s death; she thought of the men in the Bois, of that other old man, Baron Gouraud, lolling in the sun, on pillows. She climbed higher, went through the passages, climbed the servants’ stairs, made the journey towards the children’s room. When she reached the very top, she found the key on its usual nail, a big, rusty
  
key, on which spiders had spun their web. The lock gave a plaintive cry. How sad the children’s room was! She felt a pang on ﬁnding it so deserted, so silent. She closed the open door of the aviary, with the vague idea that it must have been through that door that the joys of her childhood had ﬂown away. She stopped before the window-boxes, still full of soil hardened and cracked like dray mud, and broke oﬀ with her ﬁngers a rhododendron stalk; this skeleton of        a plant, shrivelled and white with dust, was all that remained of their vibrant clusters of greenery. The matting, discoloured and rat-gnawed, had the melancholy of a shroud that for years has been awaiting the promised corpse. In a corner she found one of her old dolls; all the bran had ﬂowed out through a hole, and the porcelain head continued to smile with its enamelled lips, above the wasted body which seemed as if exhausted by puppet follies.
  Renée felt that she was suﬀocating amid this tainted atmosphere of her childhood. She opened the window and looked out at the boundless landscape. There nothing was soiled. She felt again the eternal joys, the eternal youth of the open air. The sun must be sinking behind her; she saw  its rays gilding with inﬁnite softness  the part of the city she knew so well. It was a last song of daylight. Below, ruddy ﬂames lit up the boom, while the lacework of the iron chains of the Pont de Constantine stood out against the whiteness    of its supports. To the right, the dark foliage of the Halle aux Vins and the Jardin des Plantes seemed like a great pool of stagnant, moss-covered water, whose green surface blended in the distance with the mist of the sky. On the left, the Quai Henri IV and the Quai de la Rapée displayed the same row of houses that the little girls used to gaze at twenty years before, with the same brown patches of sheds, the same red factory chimneys. Above the trees, the slated roof of the Salpêtrière, made blue by the setting sun, seemed suddenly like an old friend. But what calmed her was the long grey banks, and above all the Seine itself, the giant, which she watched coming from the horizon straight down to her, as in the happy days when they had been afraid that it might swell and surge up to their window. She remembered their fondness for the river, their love of its colossal ﬂux, the ripples of the water, spread out like a sheet at their feet, opening out around them, behind them, into two arms which they could not see, though they could still feel its great, pure caress. They were already very concerned about their appearance, and they used
  

to say, on ﬁne days, that the Seine had put on its pretty dress of  green silk shot with white ﬂames; and the eddies where the water rippled trimmed the dress with frills of satin, while in the distance, beyond the belt of the bridges, splashes of light spread out lappets  of sun-coloured stuﬀ.
  Renée, raising her eyes, gazed at the vast arch of pale blue sky, fading slowly in the twilight. She thought of the complicitous city, of the ﬂaring lights of the boulevards, of the sultry afternoons in the Bois, of the crude, pallid days in the great, new mansions. Then, when she lowered her head and glanced again at the peaceful horizon of her childhood, this corner of a bourgeois and workmen’s city, where she had dreamt of a life of peace and tranquillity, a ﬁnal bitter taste rose to her lips. With clasped hands, she sobbed as darkness came.
  Next winter, when Renée died of acute meningitis, her  father paid her debts. Worms’s bill came to two hundred and ﬁfty-seven thousand francs.
  
.
